1   1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach art in the grades indicated.                                                  
101 1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach multiple-subject-matter (self-contained) classes, and to teach the subject or 
101 2Ssubjects listed as majors and minors in departmentalized classes, in grades kindergarten through nine.  In addition, the     
101 3Sholder is authorized to teach elementary level reading in continuation classes, in continuation high schools, or in high     
101 4Sschools.                                                                                                                     
101A1SThis credential, with a major in a non-academic subject only, authorizes the holder to teach the subjects listed as majors   
101A2Sand minors in departmentalized classes in grades kindergarten through nine.  In addition, the holder is authorized to teach  
101A3Selementary level reading in continuation classes, in continuation high schools, or in high schools.                          
102 1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach in grades three and below, including preschool.  In addition, the holder is   
102 2Sauthorized to teach elementary level reading in continuation classes, in continuation high schools, or in high schools.      
103 1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the subject or subjects listed as majors and minors in departmentalized       
103 2Sclasses, and to teach introductory courses within the general area of any subject or subjects listed as majors, in grades    
103 3Sseven through twelve.                                                                                                        
104 1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the subject or subjects listed as majors in grades thirteen and fourteen and  
104 2Sin classes organized primarily for adults, and to teach the subject or subjects listed as minors in grades thirteen and      
104 3Sfourteen if the governing board of the district specifically authorizes the holder to do so on an annual basis.              
104A1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the subject or subjects listed as majors in grades eleven through fourteen    
104A2Sin classes organized primarily for adults, and to teach the subject or subjects listed as minors in grades thirteen and      
104A3S fourteen if the governing board of the district specifically authorizes the holder to do so on an annual basis.             
105 1SIn addition, this credential authorizes the holder to teach art in grades kindergarten through six.                          
106 1SIn addition, this credential authorizes the holder to teach music in grades kindergarten through six.                        
107 1SContact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
107B1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach handicapped children in a special class in which the primary disability is    
107B2Sdeaf-blind as defined in subsection 300.5 of Title 34 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Subpart A, in the grades           
107D1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach handicapped children in a special class in which the primary disability is    
107D2S"deaf or hard-of-hearing" as defined in subsection 300.5 of Title 34 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Subpart A, in the   
107D3Sgrades indicated.                                                                                                            
107E1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach handicapped children in a special class in which the primary disability is    
107E2S"specific learning disability" or "mentally retarded (mild)" as defined in subsection 300.5 of Title 34 of the Code of       
107E3SFederal Regulations, Subpart A, in the grades indicated.                                                                     
107H1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach handicapped children in a special class in which the primary disability is    
107H2S"deaf or deaf-blind" or "hard-of-hearing" as defined in subsection 300.5 of Title 34 of the Code of Federal Regulations,     
107H3SSubpart A, in the grades indicated.                                                                                          
107L1SThis credential authorizes the holder to serve as a school librarian in the grades indicated.                                
107M1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach handicapped children in a special class in which the primary disability is    
107M2Sspecific learning disability or "mentally retarded (mild)" or "mentally retarded (severely)" or "multi-handicapped" as       
107M3Sdefined in subsection 300.5 of Title 34 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Subpart A, in the grades indicated.              
107O1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach handicapped children in a special class in which the primary disability is    
107O2S"multi-handicapped" or "orthopedically impaired" or "other health impaired (having limited strength, vitality or alertness)" 
107O3Sas defined in subsection 300.5 of Title 34 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Subpart A, in the grades indicated.           
107S1SThis credential authorizes the holder to provide clinical or rehabilitative services in speech and hearing and to teach      
107S2Shandicapped children in a special class in which the primary disability is "speech and language impaired" as defined in      
107S3Ssubsection 300.5 of Title 34 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Subpart A, in the grades indicated.                         
107T1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach handicapped children in a special class in which the primary disability is    
107T2S"mentally retarded (severely)" or "multi-handicapped" as defined in subsection 300.5 of Title 34 of the Code of Federal      
107T3SRegulations, Subpart A, in the grades indicated.                                                                             
107V1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach handicapped children in a special class in which the primary disability is    
107V2Svisually handicapped as defined in subsection 300.5 of Title 34 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Subpart A, in the grades 
107V3Sindicated.                                                                                                                   
107X1SThis credential authorizes the holder to provide instruction in orientation and mobility to the visually handicapped in the  
107X2Sgrades indicated.                                                                                                            
108 1SContact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
10A 1PThis permit authorizes the holder to perform service in the care, development, and instruction of children in a child        
10A 2Pdevelopment program.  This permit was originally issued under regulations that became effective on January 30, 1986.         
10B 1PThis permit authorizes the holder to supervise a child development program consisting of any number of children's facilities 
10B 2Pand to perform service in the care, development, and instruction of children in a child development program.  This permit    
10B 3P originally issued under regulations that became effective on January 30, 1986.                                              
11  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the industrial arts subject or subjects listed in the grades indicated.       
12  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the industrial arts subject or subjects listed in the grades indicated for    
12  2G more than half-time.                                                                                                        
12A 1PThis permit authorizes the holder to care for and assist in the development and instruction of children in a child care and  
12A 2Pdevelopment program under the supervision of the holder of any Children's Center or Child Development Permit except a Child  
12A 3PDevelopment Assistant Permit.                                                                                                
12AA1PThis permit authorizes the holder to care for and assist in the development and instruction of children in a child care and  
12AA2Pdevelopment program under the supervision of the holder of any Children's Center or Child Development Permit except a Child  
12AA3PDevelopment Assistant Permit.  In addition, the holder is authorized to provide services in the care, development and        
12AA4Pinstruction of children in before-school, after-school, and other school age child care programs.                            
12B 1PThis permit authorizes the holder to provide service in the care, development, and instruction of children in a child care   
12B 2Pand development program, and to supervise a Child Development Assistant Permit holder.                                       
12BB1PThis permit authorizes the holder to provide service in the care, development, and instruction of children in a child care   
12BB2Pand development program, and to supervise a Child Development Assistant Permit holder.  In addition, the holder is           
12BB3Pto provide services in the care, development and instruction of children in before-school, after-school, and other school    
12BB4P age child care programs.                                                                                                    
12C 1PThis permit authorizes the holder to provide service in the care, development, and instruction of children in a child care   
12C 2Pand development program, and to supervise a Child Development Associate Teacher or Assistant, the holder of an equivalent    
12C 3Ppermit issued under previous regulations, and an aide.                                                                       
12CC1PThis permit authorizes the holder to provide service in the care, development, and instruction of children in a child care   
12CC2Pand development program, and to supervise a Child Development Associate Teacher or Assistant, the holder of an equivalent    
12CC3Ppermit issued under previous regulations, and an aide.  In addition, the holder is authorized to provide services in the     
12CC4Pcare, development and instruction of children in before-school, after-school, and other school age child care programs.      
12D 1PThis permit authorizes the holder to provide service in the care, development, and instruction of children in a child care   
12D 2Pand development program, and to supervise a Child Development Permit Teacher, Associate Teacher, or Assistant, or the holder 
12D 3Pof an equivalent permit issued under previous regulations, and an aide.  This permit also authorizes the holder to serve as  
12D 4Pa coordinator of curriculum and staff development in a child care and development program.                                   
12DD1PThis permit authorizes the holder to provide service in the care, development, and instruction of children in a child care   
12DD2Pand development program, and to supervise a Child Development Permit teacher, Associate Teacher, or Assistant, or the holder 
12DD3Pof an equivalent permit issued under previous regulations, and an aide.  This permit also authorizes the holder to serve as  
12DD4Pa coordinator of curriculum and staff development in a child care and development program.  In addition, the holder is       
12DD5Pauthorized to provide services in the care, development and instruction of children in before-school, after-school, and      
12DD6P school age child care programs.                                                                                             
12E 1PThis permit authorizes the holder to supervise a child care and development program operating at a single site, provide      
12E 2Pservice in the care, development, and instruction of children in a child care and development program, and serve as a        
12E 3Pcoordinator of curriculum and staff development in a child care and development program.                                     
12EE1PThis permit authorizes the holder to supervise a child care and development program operating at a single site, provide      
12EE2Pservice in the care, development, and instruction of children in a child care and development program, and serve as a        
12EE3Pcoordinator of curriculum and staff development in a child care and development program.  In addition, the holder is         
12EE4Pauthorized to provide services in the care, development and instruction of children in before-school, after-school, and      
12EE5P school age child care programs.                                                                                             
12F 1PThis permit authorizes the holder to supervise a child care and development program operating at a single or multiple sites, 
12F 2Pprovide service in the care, development, and instruction of children in a child care and development program, and serve as  
12F 3Pa coordinator of curriculum and staff development in a child care and development program.                                   
12FF1PThis permit authorizes the holder to supervise a child care and development program operation at a single or multiple site,  
12FF2Pprovide service in the care, development, and instruction of children in a child care and development program, and serve as  
12FF3Pa coordinator of curriculum and staff development in a child care and development program.  In addition, the holder is       
12FF4Pauthorized to provide services in the care, development and instruction of children in before-school, after-school, and      
12FF5P school age child care programs.                                                                                             
12IC1RThe Independent Care Emphasis Added Authorization authorizes the holder to temporarily supervise children in a child care    
12IC2Rdevelopment program independently for no more than 120 minutes per day. Service in this capacity must be accompanied by a    
12IC3R valid Child Development Assistant Permit.                                                                                   
14  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach music in the grades indicated.                                                
16  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach nursing education in the grades indicated.                                    
18  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach physical education in the grades indicated.                                   
19  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach public safety and accident prevention, including driver education and driver  
19  2Gtraining, in the grades indicated.                                                                                           
1A  1PThis permit authorizes the holder to supervise a children's center program consisting of any number of centers and to        
1A  2Psupervise and instruct children in a children's center program.  This permit was originally issued under regulations that    
1A  3Pbecame effective on or before September 15, 1961.                                                                            
1B  1PThis permit authorizes the holder to supervise a children's center program consisting of one or two centers, to supervise a  
1B  2Pchildren's center program in a single center of a program consisting of three or more centers, and to supervise and instruct 
1B  3Pchildren in a children's center.  This permit was originally issued under regulations that became effective on or before     
1B  4PSeptember 15, 1961.                                                                                                          
1C  1PThis permit authorizes the holder to perform services in the supervision and instruction of children in a children's center. 
1C  2PThis permit was originally issued under regulations that became effective on or before September 15, 1961.                   
2   1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach aviation in the grades indicated.                                             
20  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach sciences basic to medicine in the grades indicated.                           
201A1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach basic military drill in high schools and junior colleges.                     
201J1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach basic military drill in grades seven through twelve.                          
202A1SThis credential authorizes the holder to serve as an administrator or instructor for a unit of the Reserve Officers'         
202A2S Corps program in high schools and junior colleges.                                                                          
202B1SThis credential authorizes the holder to serve as an administrator or instructor for a unit of the Reserve Officers'         
202B2S Corps program in high schools.                                                                                              
203 1SContact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
203A1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the subject or subjects listed in courses organized primarily for adults in   
203A2Selementary, high school, and community college adult programs for not more than 120 clock hours per year.                    
203B1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the subject or subjects listed in courses organized primarily for adults in   
203B2Selementary and high school adult programs for not more than 120 clock hours per year.                                        
203C1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the subject or subjects listed in courses organized primarily for adults in   
203C2Selementary, high school, and community college adult programs.                                                               
203D1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the subject or subjects listed in courses organized primarily for adults in   
203D2Selementary and high school adult programs.                                                                                   
203G1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the subject or subjects listed in grades nine through fourteen and in classes 
203G2Sorganized primarily for adults in elementary, high school, and community college adult programs.                             
203H1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the subject or subjects listed in grades thirteen and fourteen and in classes 
203H2Sorganized primarily for adults in elementary, high school, and community college adult programs, for not more than one-half  
203H3Sof a full-time teaching assignment.                                                                                          
203I1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the subject or subjects listed in grades nine through twelve and in classes   
203I2Sorganized primarily for adults in elementary and high school adult programs.                                                 
203J1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the subject or subjects listed in grades seven through twelve and in classes  
203J2Sorganized primarily for adults in elementary and high school adult programs, for not more than one-half of a full-time       
203J3Steaching assignment.                                                                                                         
204A1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the business subject or subjects listed and to evaluate pupil occupational    
204A2Sperformance and relate such performance to classroom instruction in secondary schools and classes organized primarily for    
204A3Sadults in elementary, high school, and community college adult programs.                                                     
204B1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the business subject or subjects listed and to evaluate pupil occupational    
204B2Sperformance and relate such performance to classroom instruction, for not more than one-half of a full-time teaching         
204B3Sassignment, in grades thirteen and fourteen and in classes organized primarily for adults in elementary, high school, and    
204B4Scommunity college adult programs.                                                                                            
204C1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the business subject or subjects listed and to evaluate pupil occupational    
204C2Sperformance and relate such performance to classroom instruction in grades seven through twelve and in classes organized     
204C3Sprimarily for adults in elementary and high school adult programs.                                                           
204D1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the business subject or subjects listed and to evaluate pupil occupational    
204D2Sperformance and relate such performance to classroom instruction, for not more than one-half of a full-time teaching         
204D3Sassignment, in classes organized primarily for adults in elementary and high school adult programs.                          
205A1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach public safety and accident prevention, including driver education and driver  
205A2Straining, full-time, in grades kindergarten through fourteen and in classes organized primarily for adults in elementary,    
205A3Shigh school, and community college adult programs.                                                                           
205B1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach public safety and accident prevention, including driver education and driver  
205B2Straining, full-time, in grades kindergarten through twelve and in classes organized primarily for adults in elementary and   
205B3Shigh school adult programs.                                                                                                  
205C1SContact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
205D1SContact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
205E1Contact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
205F1SContact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
206A1SContact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
206B1SContact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
207A1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the subject or subjects named in industrial arts and occupational classes in  
207A2Sgrades nine through twelve.                                                                                                  
208E1SThis credential authorizes the holder to provide the aviation instruction named at all grade levels, up to and including     
208E2Sgrade fourteen.                                                                                                              
208P1SThis credential authorizes the holder to provide the aviation instruction named at all grade levels, up to and including     
208P2Sgrade twelve.                                                                                                                
209A1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the general and specific agricultural subject or subjects listed in grades    
209A2Sseven through twelve and in classes organized primarily for adults in elementary, high school, and community college adult   
209A3Sprograms.                                                                                                                    
209B1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the general and specific agricultural subject or subjects listed in grades    
209B2Sseven through twelve and in classes organized primarily for adults in elementary and high school adult programs.             
21  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the speech arts, including public speaking, oral expression, and dramatic     
21  2G in the grades indicated.                                                                                                    
210 1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach Afro-American Studies in grades one through twelve and in classes organized   
210 2Sprimarily for adults in elementary and high school adult programs.                                                           
211 1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the subject or subjects listed in industrial arts and in vocational, trade or 
211 2Stechnical classes in grades nine through twelve.                                                                             
22  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to provide clinical or rehabilitative services in speech and hearing and to teach      
22  2Ghandicapped children in a special class in which the primary disability is "speech and language impaired" as defined in      
22  3Gsubsection 300.5 of Title 34 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Subpart A, in the grades indicated.                         
23  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the trade, industrial, or public service occupation or occupations listed in  
23  2Gthe grades indicated, and to coordinate or supervise these classes if "including coordination" or "including supervision" is 
23  3Glisted beside the occupation.                                                                                                
24  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the trade or industrial occupation or occupations listed in the grades        
24  2Gindicated and/or to teach the junior college engineering subject or subjects listed, and to coordinate or supervise these    
24  3Gclasses if "including coordination" or "including supervision" is listed beside the occupation or subject.                   
25  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to coordinate trade, industrial, or public service classes in the subject or subjects  
25  2Glisted in the grades indicated.                                                                                              
26  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to coordinate classes in the subject or subjects listed, as well as classes in         
26  2Gmiscellaneous occupations and cooperative education, in the grades indicated.                                                
27  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach military science and tactics in the grades indicated.                         
28  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the subject or subjects listed in classes for adults in elementary and high   
28  2Gschool adult programs.                                                                                                       
28JC1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the subject or subjects listed in classes for adults in elementary, high      
28JC2Gschool, and community college adult programs.                                                                                
29  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach lip reading to hard-of-hearing adults in elementary, high school, and         
29  2Gcommunity college adult programs.                                                                                            
2A  1PThis permit authorizes the holder to supervise a children's center program consisting of any number of centers and to        
2A  2Psupervise and instruct children in a children's center program.  This permit was originally issued under regulations that    
2A  3Pbecame effective on October 15, 1966.                                                                                        
2B  1PThis permit authorizes the holder to supervise a children's center program consisting of one or two centers, to supervise a  
2B  2Pchildren's center program in a single center of a program consisting of three or more centers, and to supervise and instruct 
2B  3Pchildren in a children's center.  This permit was originally issued under regulations that became effective on October 15,   
2B  4P1966.                                                                                                                        
2C  1PThis permit authorizes the holder to perform service in the supervision and instruction of children in a children's center.  
2C  2PThis permit was originally issued under regulations that became effective on October 15, 1966.                               
3   1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach vocational agriculture in the grades indicated.                               
30  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the subject or subjects listed in classes for adults, for not more than 120   
30  2Gclock hours in any one school year.                                                                                          
301 1SThis credential authorizes the holder to perform the health service named in the grades indicated.                           
302 1SThis credential authorizes the holder to perform pupil personnel services in the field or fields listed in the grades        
302 2Sindicated.                                                                                                                   
303A1SThis credential authorizes the holder to serve in a supervisory capacity in the subject or program listed in the grades      
303A2Sindicated.                                                                                                                   
304A1SThis credential authorizes the holder to serve as a supervisor, consultant, coordinator, or intermediate-level administrator 
304A2Sor supervisor for instructional programs in the grades indicated.                                                            
304B1SThis credential authorizes the holder to serve as a supervisor, consultant, coordinator, or intermediate-level administrator 
304B2Sor supervisor for instructional programs in the grades named on the prerequisite credential or credentials; and as a         
304B3Sprincipal in the grades indicated.                                                                                           
304C1SThis credential authorizes the holder to serve as a superintendent, principal, supervisor, consultant, coordinator, or       
304C2Sintermediate-level administrator or supervisor in the grades indicated.                                                      
305 1SThis credential authorizes the holder to serve as a principal in the grades indicated.                                       
32  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the business subject or subjects listed in the grades indicated on a          
32  2G basis.                                                                                                                      
33  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach handicapped children in a special class in which the primary disability is    
33  2G"specific learning disability" or "mentally retarded (mild)" or "mentally retarded (severely)" or "multi-handicapped" as     
33  3Gdefined in subsection 300.5 of Title 34 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Subpart A, in the grades indicated.              
34  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach handicapped children in a special class in which the primary disability is    
34  2G"multi-handicapped" or "orthopedically impaired" or "other health impaired (having limited strength, vitality or alterness)" 
34  3Gas defined in subsection 300.5 of Title 34 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Subpart A, in the grades indicated.           
3A  1PThis permit authorizes the holder to instruct children in a child development program.  This permit was originally issued    
3A  2P under regulations that became effective on October 15, 1974.                                                                
3B  1PThis permit authorizes the holder to supervise in a child development program consisting of any number of children's         
3B  2Pfacilities and to instruct children in a child development program.  This permit was originally issued under regulations     
3B  3P became effective on October 15, 1974.                                                                                       
4   1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the designated subject or subjects listed in the grades indicated.            
40  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the authorized field or fields listed, and also the subjects basic to         
40  2G and commerce, in the grades indicated.                                                                                      
41  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach homemaking in the grades indicated.                                           
42  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the industrial arts subject or subjects listed, and also comprehensive        
42  2G shop, in the grades indicated.                                                                                              
43  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the music subject or subjects listed, and also theoretical music, music       
43  2Gappreciation, dictation, and music reading, in the grades indicated.                                                         
44  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the subject or subjects listed in the grades indicated for a part of the day  
44  2Gto workers on the job or in evening high school trade extension classes or cooperative education classes in high schools or  
44  3Gin industry or in short unit pre-employment classes.                                                                         
49  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to serve as a child welfare and supervision-of-attendance officer in grades            
49  2Gkindergarten through fourteen.                                                                                               
4A  1PThis permit authorizes the holder to perform service in the care, development, and instruction of children in a child        
4A  2Pdevelopment program.  This permit was originally issued under regulations that became effective on January 1, 1979.          
4B  1PThis permit authorizes the holder to supervise a child development program consisting of any number of children's facilities 
4B  2Pand to perform service in the care, development, and instruction of children in a child development program.  This permit    
4B  3P originally issued under regulations that became effective on January 1, 1979.                                               
50  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to serve as a supervisor of health in the authorized health service field listed in    
50  2G grades indicated.                                                                                                           
51  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to perform basic pupil personnel services in the grades named in the fields of child   
51  2Gwelfare and supervision of attendance, pupil counseling, and school social work, and to supervise other persons performing   
51  3Gpupil personnel services.                                                                                                    
51A 1GThis credential authorizes the holder to perform basic pupil personnel services in the grades named in the fields of child   
51A 2Gwelfare and supervision of attendance, pupil counseling, and school social work; to serve as a school psychometrist; and to  
51A 3Gsupervise other persons performing pupil personnel services.                                                                 
51B 1GThis credential authorizes the holder to perform basic pupil personnel services in the grades named in the fields of child   
51B 2Gwelfare and supervision of attendance, pupil counseling, and school social work; to serve as a school psychometrist; to      
51B 3G as a school psychologist; and to supervise other persons performing pupil personnel services.                               
51C 1GThis credential authorizes the holder to serve as a school psychometrist in grades kindergarten through fourteen.            
51D 1GThis credential authorizes the holder to serve as a school psychologist in grades kindergarten through fourteen.             
52  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to serve as a superintendent, associate superintendent, deputy superintendent,         
52  2Gassistant superintendent, principal, supervisor, consultant, coordinator, or in an equivalent or intermediate level          
52  3Gadministrative position in the grades indicated.                                                                             
52A 1GThis credential authorizes the holder to serve as a superintendent, associate superintendent, deputy superintendent,         
52A 2Gassistant superintendent, principal, supervisor, consultant, coordinator, or in an equivalent supervisory or intermediate    
52A 3Glevel administrative position in trade and industrial education in the grades indicated.                                     
53  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to serve as a supervisor, consultant, coordinator, or in an equivalent supervisory or  
53  2Gintermediate level administrative position in the grades indicated. Supervision of instruction is restricted to the area or  
53  3Gareas authorized by the prerequisite teaching credential.                                                                    
53A 1GThis credential authorizes the holder to serve as a supervisor, consultant, coordinator, or in an equivalent supervisory or  
53A 2Gintermediate level administrative position in the subject or subjects listed in the grades indicated.                        
53B 1GThis credential authorizes the holder to supervise the preparation of budgets of funds to be used for education purposes in  
53B 2Ggrades kindergarten through fourteen.                                                                                        
58  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to serve as a school librarian and to teach librarianship in the grades indicated.     
5A  1GThis permit authorizes the holder to perform the services of instruction, guidance, and care of children in a special center 
5A  2Gfor the handicapped.                                                                                                         
5A  1PThis permit authorizes the holder to perform the services of instruction, guidance, and care of children in a special center 
5A  2Pfor the handicapped.                                                                                                         
6   1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the subject or subjects listed and to coordinate business occupational        
6   2Gperformance with class instruction in the grades indicated.                                                                  
60  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to administer a secondary school as principal or supervisor serving under a            
60  2Gsuperintendent of schools.                                                                                                   
61  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to administer elementary education as a principal or supervisor serving under a        
61  2Gsuperintendent of schools.                                                                                                   
7   1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach handicapped children in a special class in which the primary disability is    
7   2Gvisually handicapped as defined in subsection 300.5 of Title 34 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Subpart A, in the grades 
7   3Gindicated.                                                                                                                   
8   1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach handicapped children in a special class in which the primary disability is    
8   2G"deaf or hard-of-hearing" as defined in subsection 300.5 of Title 34 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Subpart A, in the   
8   3Ggrades indicated.                                                                                                            
AAAS1RThe autism spectrum disorders added authorization authorizes the holder to conduct assessments, provide instruction, and     
AAAS2Rspecial education related services to individuals with a primary disability of autism across the continuum of special        
AAAS3Reducation program options at the grade and age levels authorized by the prerequisite credential.                             
AADB1RThe deaf-blind added authorization authorizes the holder to conduct assessments, provide instruction, and special education  
AADB2Rrelated services to individuals with a primary disability of deaf-blind across the continuum of special education program    
AADB3Roptions at the grade and age levels authorized by the prerequisite credential.                                               
AAED1RThe emotional disturbance added authorization authorizes the holder to conduct assessments, provide instruction, and special 
AAED2Reducation related services to individuals with a primary disability of emotional disturbance across the continuum of special 
AAED3Reducation program options at the grade and age levels authorized by the prerequisite credential.                             
AAOH1RThe other health impairment added authorization authorizes the holder to conduct assessments, provide instruction, and       
AAOH2Rspecial education related services to individuals with a primary disability of other health impairment across the continuum  
AAOH3Rof special education program options at the grade and age levels authorized by the prerequisite credential.                  
AAOI1RThe orthopedic impairment added authorization authorizes the holder to conduct assessments, provide instruction, and special 
AAOI2Reducation related services to individuals with a primary disability of orthopedic impairment across the continuum of special 
AAOI3Reducation program options at the grade and age levels authorized by the prerequisite credential.                             
AATB1RThe traumatic brain injury added authorization authorizes the holder to conduct assessments, provide instruction, and        
AATB2Reducation related services to individuals with a primary disability of traumatic brain injury across the continuum of        
AATB3R special education program options at the grade and age levels authorized by the prerequisite credential.                    
ABBA1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners limited to the grades authorized by the intern      
ABBA2Rcredential: (1) instruction for English language development; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in        
ABBA3Rin the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
ABBA4RArabic in the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; and (4) instruction for primary language            
ABBA5R development in the language of Arabic.                                                                                      
AILA1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach the specific American Indian language(s) listed in departmentalized classrooms  
AILA2Rin preschool, grades K through 12, and in classes organized primarily for adults.                                            
AILC1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach the specific American Indian culture(s) listed in departmentalized classrooms   
AILC2R preschool, grades K through 12, and in classes organized primarily for adults.                                              
APEA1RThe Adapted Physical Education Specialist Credential authorizes the holder to conduct Educational Assessments related to     
APEA2Rstudents' progress towards meeting instructional physical education goals, provide instruction, and Specialist Education     
APEA3RSupport to teach students with special needs who are precluded from participation in the activities of the general physical  
APEA4Reducation program or a specially designed physical education program in a special class, from birth through age 22,          
APEA5R preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.                                                                   
ARBA1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners limited to the grades authorized by the intern      
ARBA2Rcredential: (1) instruction for English language development; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in        
ARBA3Rin the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
ARBA4RArmenian in the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; and (4) instruction for primary language          
ARBA5R development in the language of Armenian.                                                                                    
ASBA1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners limited to the grades authorized by the intern      
ASBA2Rcredential: (1) instruction for English language development; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in        
ASBA3Rin the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
ASBA4RAmerican Sign Language in the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; and (4) instruction for primary     
ASBA5R language development in the language of American Sign Language.                                                             
ASCC1RThe Activity Supervisor Clearance Certificate is verification that you have cleared the commission's professional fitness    
ASCC2Rreview process.                                                                                                              
AUDL1RThis Audiology authorization authorizes the holder to conduct audiologic assessments, provide instruction and management of  
AUDL2Rindividual and classroom amplification and assistive listening devises, central auditory processing testing, and related     
AUDL3Rspecial education services to individuals with a primary or secondary disability of deaf or hard of hearing, deaf-blind, and 
AUDL4Ra hearing loss that manifests itself in conjunction with additional disabilities including unilateral or bilateral, whether  
AUDL5Rfluctuating, conductive, sensorineural, and/or auditory neuropathy, to students from birth to age 22 in services across the  
AUDL6Rcontinuum of program options available.                                                                                      
BAAB1PThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BAAB2P grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BAAB3Por permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BAAB4Pdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BAAB5Pcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BAAB6Pgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
BAAB7Pin the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4) instruction   
BAAB8Pfor primary language development in the language of Arabic in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes   
BAAB9Porganized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching   
BAABAPcredential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary language            
BAABBPinstruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also covers     
BAABCPclasses authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section         
BAAB1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BAAB2R grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BAAB3Ror permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BAAB4Rdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BAAB5Rcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BAAB6Rgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
BAAB7Rin the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4) instruction   
BAAB8Rfor primary language development in the language of Arabic in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes   
BAAB9Rorganized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching   
BAABARcredential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary language            
BAABBRinstruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also covers     
BAABCRclasses authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section         
BAAR1PThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BAAR2P grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BAAR3Por permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BAAR4Pdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BAAR5Pcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BAAR6Pgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
BAAR7PArmenian in the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4)      
BAAR8Pinstruction for primary language development in the language of Armenian in grades twelve and below, including preschool,    
BAAR9Pin classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult           
BAARAP education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary 
BAARBPlanguage instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also   
BAARCPcovers classes authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section  
BAAR1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BAAR2R grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BAAR3Ror permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BAAR4Rdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BAAR5Rcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BAAR6Rgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
BAAR7RArmenian in the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4)      
BAAR8Rinstruction for primary language development in the language of Armenian in grades twelve and below, including preschool,    
BAAR9Rin classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult           
BAARAR education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary 
BAARBRlanguage instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also   
BAARCRcovers classes authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section  
BAAS1PThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BAAS2P grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BAAS3Por permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BAAS4Pdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BAAS5Pcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BAAS6Pgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
BAAS7PAmerican Sign Language in the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or        
BAAS8Pand (4) instruction for primary language development in the language of American Sign Language in grades twelve and below,   
BAAS9Pincluding preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a            
BAASAPdesignated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development    
BAASBPsupervision permit, primary language instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This    
BAASCPbilingual authorization also covers classes authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as         
BAAS1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BAAS2R grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BAAS3Ror permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BAAS4Rdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BAAS5Rcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BAAS6Rgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
BAAS7RAmerican Sign Language in the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or        
BAAS8Rand (4) instruction for primary language development in the language of American Sign Language in grades twelve and below,   
BAAS9Rincluding preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a            
BAASARdesignated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development    
BAASBRsupervision permit, primary language instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This    
BAASCRbilingual authorization also covers classes authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as         
BACA1PThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BACA2P grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BACA3Por permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BACA4Pdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BACA5Pcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BACA6Pgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
BACA7PCantonese in the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4)     
BACA8Pinstruction for primary language development in the language of Cantonese in grades twelve and below, including preschool,   
BACA9Pand in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult       
BACAAPeducation teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary  
BACABPlanguage instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also   
BACACPcovers classes authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section  
BACA1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BACA2R grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BACA3Ror permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BACA4Rdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BACA5Rcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BACA6Rgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
BACA7RCantonese in the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4)     
BACA8Rinstruction for primary language development in the language of Cantonese in grades twelve and below, including preschool,   
BACA9Rand in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult       
BACAAReducation teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary  
BACABRlanguage instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also   
BACACRcovers classes authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section  
BAFA1PThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BAFA2P grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BAFA3Por permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BAFA4Pdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BAFA5Pcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BAFA6Pgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of Farsi 
BAFA7Pin the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4) instruction   
BAFA8Pfor primary language development in the language of Farsi in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes    
BAFA9Porganized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching   
BAFAAPcredential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary language            
BAFABPinstruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also covers     
BAFACPclasses authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section         
BAFA1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BAFA2R grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BAFA3Ror permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BAFA4Rdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BAFA5Rcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BAFA6Rgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of Farsi 
BAFA7Rin the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4) instruction   
BAFA8Rfor primary language development in the language of Farsi in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes    
BAFA9Rorganized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching   
BAFAARcredential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary language            
BAFABRinstruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also covers     
BAFACRclasses authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section         
BAFI1PThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BAFI2P grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BAFI3Por permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BAFI4Pdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BAFI5Pcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BAFI6Pgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
BAFI7PFilipino in the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4)      
BAFI8Pinstruction for primary language development in the language of Filipino in grades twelve and below, including preschool,    
BAFI9Pin classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult           
BAFIAP education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary 
BAFIBPlanguage instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also   
BAFICPcovers classes authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section  
BAFI1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BAFI2R grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BAFI3Ror permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BAFI4Rdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BAFI5Rcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BAFI6Rgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
BAFI7RFilipino in the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4)      
BAFI8Rinstruction for primary language development in the language of Filipino in grades twelve and below, including preschool,    
BAFI9Rin classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult           
BAFIAR education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary 
BAFIBRlanguage instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also   
BAFICRcovers classes authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section  
BAFR1PThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BAFR2P grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BAFR3Por permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BAFR4Pdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BAFR5Pcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BAFR6Pgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
BAFR7Pin the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4) instruction   
BAFR8Pfor primary language development in the language of French in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes   
BAFR9Porganized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching   
BAFRAPcredential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary language            
BAFRBPinstruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also covers     
BAFRCPclasses authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section         
BAFR1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BAFR2R grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BAFR3Ror permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BAFR4Rdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BAFR5Rcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BAFR6Rgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
BAFR7Rin the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4) instruction   
BAFR8Rfor primary language development in the language of French in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes   
BAFR9Rorganized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching   
BAFRARcredential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary language            
BAFRBRinstruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also covers     
BAFRCRclasses authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section         
BAGR1PThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BAGR2P grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BAGR3Por permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BAGR4Pdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BAGR5Pcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BAGR6Pgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
BAGR7Pin the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4) instruction   
BAGR8Pfor primary language development in the language of German in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes   
BAGR9Porganized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching   
BAGRAPcredential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary language            
BAGRBPinstruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also covers     
BAGRCPclasses authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section         
BAGR1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BAGR2R grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BAGR3Ror permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BAGR4Rdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BAGR5Rcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BAGR6Rgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
BAGR7Rin the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4) instruction   
BAGR8Rfor primary language development in the language of German in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes   
BAGR9Rorganized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching   
BAGRARcredential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary language            
BAGRBRinstruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also covers     
BAGRCRclasses authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section         
BAHM1PThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BAHM2P grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BAHM3Por permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BAHM4Pdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BAHM5Pcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BAHM6Pgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of Hmong 
BAHM7Pin the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4) instruction   
BAHM8Pfor primary language development in the language of Hmong in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes    
BAHM9Porganized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching   
BAHMAPcredential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary language            
BAHMBPinstruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also covers     
BAHMCPclasses authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section         
BAHM1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BAHM2R grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BAHM3Ror permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BAHM4Rdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BAHM5Rcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BAHM6Rgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of Hmong 
BAHM7Rin the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4) instruction   
BAHM8Rfor primary language development in the language of Hmong in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes    
BAHM9Rorganized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching   
BAHMARcredential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary language            
BAHMBRinstruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also covers     
BAHMCRclasses authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section         
BAHW1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BAHW2R grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BAHW3Ror permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BAHW4Rdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BAHW5Rcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BAHW6Rgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
BAHW7Rin the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4) instruction   
BAHW8Rfor primary language development in the language of Hebrew in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes   
BAHW9Rorganized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching   
BAHWARcredential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary language            
BAHWBRinstruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also covers     
BAHWCRclasses authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section         
BAJA1PThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BAJA2P grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BAJA3Por permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BAJA4Pdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BAJA5Pcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BAJA6Pgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
BAJA7PJapanese in the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4)      
BAJA8Pinstruction for primary language development in the language of Japanese in grades twelve and below, including preschool,    
BAJA9Pin classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult           
BAJAAP education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary 
BAJABPlanguage instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also   
BAJACPcovers classes authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section  
BAJA1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BAJA2R grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BAJA3Ror permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BAJA4Rdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BAJA5Rcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BAJA6Rgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
BAJA7RJapanese in the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4)      
BAJA8Rinstruction for primary language development in the language of Japanese in grades twelve and below, including preschool,    
BAJA9Rin classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult           
BAJAAR education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary 
BAJABRlanguage instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also   
BAJACRcovers classes authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section  
BAKM1PThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BAKM2P grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BAKM3Por permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BAKM4Pdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BAKM5Pcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BAKM6Pgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of Khmer 
BAKM7Pin the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4) instruction   
BAKM8Pfor primary language development in the language of Khmer in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes    
BAKM9Porganized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching   
BAKMAPcredential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary language            
BAKMBPinstruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also covers     
BAKMCPclasses authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section         
BAKM1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BAKM2R grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BAKM3Ror permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BAKM4Rdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BAKM5Rcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BAKM6Rgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of Khmer 
BAKM7Rin the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4) instruction   
BAKM8Rfor primary language development in the language of Khmer in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes    
BAKM9Rorganized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching   
BAKMARcredential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary language            
BAKMBRinstruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also covers     
BAKMCRclasses authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section         
BAKO1PThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BAKO2P grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BAKO3Por permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BAKO4Pdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BAKO5Pcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BAKO6Pgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
BAKO7Pin the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4) instruction   
BAKO8Pfor primary language development in the language of Korean in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes   
BAKO9Porganized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching   
BAKOAPcredential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary language            
BAKOBPinstruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also covers     
BAKOCPclasses authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section         
BAKO1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BAKO2R grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BAKO3Ror permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BAKO4Rdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BAKO5Rcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BAKO6Rgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
BAKO7Rin the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4) instruction   
BAKO8Rfor primary language development in the language of Korean in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes   
BAKO9Rorganized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching   
BAKOARcredential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary language            
BAKOBRinstruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also covers     
BAKOCRclasses authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section         
BAMA1PThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BAMA2P grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BAMA3Por permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BAMA4Pdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BAMA5Pcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BAMA6Pgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
BAMA7PMandarin in the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4)      
BAMA8Pinstruction for primary language development in the language of Mandarin in grades twelve and below, including preschool,    
BAMA9Pin classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult           
BAMAAP education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary 
BAMABPlanguage instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also   
BAMACPcovers classes authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section  
BAMA1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BAMA2R grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BAMA3Ror permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BAMA4Rdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BAMA5Rcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BAMA6Rgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
BAMA7RMandarin in the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4)      
BAMA8Rinstruction for primary language development in the language of Mandarin in grades twelve and below, including preschool,    
BAMA9Rin classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult           
BAMAAR education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary 
BAMABRlanguage instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also   
BAMACRcovers classes authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section  
BAPO1PThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BAPO2P grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BAPO3Por permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BAPO4Pdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BAPO5Pcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BAPO6Pgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
BAPO7PPortuguese in the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4)    
BAPO8Pinstruction for primary language development in the language of Portuguese in grades twelve and below, including preschool,  
BAPO9Pand in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult       
BAPOAPeducation teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary  
BAPOBPlanguage instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also   
BAPOCPcovers classes authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section  
BAPO1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BAPO2R grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BAPO3Ror permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BAPO4Rdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BAPO5Rcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BAPO6Rgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
BAPO7RPortuguese in the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4)    
BAPO8Rinstruction for primary language development in the language of Portuguese in grades twelve and below, including preschool,  
BAPO9Rand in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult       
BAPOAReducation teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary  
BAPOBRlanguage instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also   
BAPOCRcovers classes authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section  
BAPU1PThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BAPU2P grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BAPU3Por permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BAPU4Pdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BAPU5Pcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BAPU6Pgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
BAPU7PPunjabi in the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4)       
BAPU8Pinstruction for primary language development in the language of Punjabi in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and 
BAPU9Pin classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult education 
BAPUAPteaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary language   
BAPUBPinstruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also covers     
BAPUCPclasses authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section         
BAPU1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BAPU2R grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BAPU3Ror permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BAPU4Rdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BAPU5Rcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BAPU6Rgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
BAPU7RPunjabi in the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4)       
BAPU8Rinstruction for primary language development in the language of Punjabi in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and 
BAPU9Rin classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult education 
BAPUARteaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary language   
BAPUBRinstruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also covers     
BAPUCRclasses authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section         
BARU1PThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BARU2P grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BARU3Por permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BARU4Pdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BARU5Pcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BARU6Pgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
BARU7PRussian in the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4)       
BARU8Pinstruction for primary language development in the language of Russian in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and 
BARU9Pin classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult education 
BARUAPteaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary language   
BARUBPinstruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also covers     
BARUCPclasses authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section         
BARU1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BARU2R grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BARU3Ror permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BARU4Rdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BARU5Rcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BARU6Rgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
BARU7RRussian in the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4)       
BARU8Rinstruction for primary language development in the language of Russian in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and 
BARU9Rin classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult education 
BARUARteaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary language   
BARUBRinstruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also covers     
BARUCRclasses authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section         
BASP1PThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BASP2P grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BASP3Por permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BASP4Pdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BASP5Pcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BASP6Pgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
BASP7PSpanish in the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4)       
BASP8Pinstruction for primary language development in the language of Spanish in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and 
BASP9Pin classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult education 
BASPAPteaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary language   
BASPBPinstruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also covers     
BASPCPclasses authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section         
BASP1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BASP2R grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BASP3Ror permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BASP4Rdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BASP5Rcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BASP6Rgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
BASP7RSpanish in the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4)       
BASP8Rinstruction for primary language development in the language of Spanish in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and 
BASP9Rin classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult education 
BASPARteaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary language   
BASPBRinstruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also covers     
BASPCRclasses authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section         
BAVI1PThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BAVI2P grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BAVI3Por permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BAVI4Pdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BAVI5Pcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BAVI6Pgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
BAVI7PVietnamese in the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4)    
BAVI8Pinstruction for primary language development in the language of Vietnamese in grades twelve and below, including preschool,  
BAVI9Pand in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult       
BAVIAPeducation teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary  
BAVIBPlanguage instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also   
BAVICPcovers classes authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section  
BAVI1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
BAVI2R grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
BAVI3Ror permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
BAVI4Rdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
BAVI5Rcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
BAVI6Rgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
BAVI7RVietnamese in the subjects, programs and at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (4)    
BAVI8Rinstruction for primary language development in the language of Vietnamese in grades twelve and below, including preschool,  
BAVI9Rand in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult       
BAVIAReducation teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child development supervision permit, primary  
BAVIBRlanguage instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit. This bilingual authorization also   
BAVICRcovers classes authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section  
BIP 1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach in the subject or subjects listed in grades twelve and below and in classes     
BIP 2Rorganized primarily for adults, in career technical instruction courses.                                                     
BOTH1LSpecially Designed Academic Instruction Delivered in English and English Language Development                                
CABA1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners limited to the grades authorized by the intern      
CABA2Rcredential: (1) instruction for English language development; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in        
CABA3Rin the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
CABA4RCantonese in the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; and (4) instruction for primary language         
CABA5R development in the language of Cantonese.                                                                                   
D1421RThis document authorizes the holder to provide the following services to English learners in grades six through twelve: (1)  
D1422Rinstruction for English language development; and (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English within the 
D1423Rfield or fields listed.                                                                                                      
D2421RThis document authorizes the holder to provide the following services to English learners in grades kindergarten through     
D2422Reight: (1) instruction for English language development; and (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English 
D2423Rin multiple-subject-matter (self-contained) classes.                                                                         
DHPD1RThis authorizes the holder to conduct Educational Assessments related to pupils' access to the academic core curriculum and  
DHPD2Rprogress towards meeting instructional academic goals and to provide instruction and Special Education Support to deaf and   
DHPD3Rhearing impaired pupils from birth through age 22.  Instruction and support may be provided only to pupils who are enrolled  
DHPD4Rin state special schools or who are in special classes for pupils with hearing impairments.                                  
ECSE1RThis Early Childhood Special Education Added Authorization authorizes the holder to conduct Educational Assessments related  
ECSE2Rto student's access to the academic core curriculum and progress towards meeting instructional academic goals and provide    
ECSE3Rinstructional and special Education Support to students from birth through pre-kindergarten who are eligible for early       
ECSE4Rintervention special education and support with a primary disability in specific learning disabilities, mild/moderate        
ECSE5Rintellectual disabilities, traumatic brain injury, other health impairment, autism, moderate/severe intellectual             
ECSE6Rdisabilities, emotional disturbance, and multiple disabilities including developmental delay and a disabling medical         
ECSE7Rcondition, in services across the continuum of program options available.                                                    
ELA11PThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
ELA12P grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
ELA13Por permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
ELA14Pdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
ELA15Pcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
ELA16Pgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit. This English learner authorization also covers classes     
ELA17Pauthorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section 44253.3.        
ELA11RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners: (1) instruction for English language development   
ELA12R grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. If the prerequisite credential 
ELA13Ror permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a child development instructional permit, or a child 
ELA14Rdevelopment supervision permit, English language development instruction is limited to the programs authorized by that       
ELA15Rcredential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in the subjects, programs and at the   
ELA16Rgrade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit. This English learner authorization also covers classes     
ELA17Rauthorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held, as specified in Education Code Section 44253.3.        
ELA21RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners limited to the grades authorized by the intern      
ELA22Rcredential: (1) instruction for English language development; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in        
ELA23R in the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential.                                                           
ELA31RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners limited to the settings or content/specialty        
ELA32R listed at the grade/age levels authorized by the intern credential: (1) English language development defined as instruction 
ELA33Rdesigned specifically for limited-English-proficient students to develop their listening, speaking, reading, and writing     
ELA34Rskills in English; and (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English defined as instruction in a subject   
ELA35Rarea, delivered in English, that is specially designed to meet the needs of limited-English-proficient students.             
ELAE1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners within the specialty area(s) and grade/age level    
ELAE2Rauthorization of this document: (1) English language development defined as instruction designed specifically for            
ELAE3Rlimited-English-proficient students to develop their listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills in English; and (2)    
ELAE4Rspecially designed content instruction delivered in English defined as instruction in a subject area, delivered in English,  
ELAE5Rthat is specially designed to meet the needs of limited-English-proficient students. This English learner authorization also 
ELAE6Rcovers classes taught on the basis of other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held within the settings or          
ELAE7Rcontent/specialty area(s) listed at the grade or age levels authorized.                                                      
ELAM1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners in the settings and content area(s) specified on    
ELAM2Rthis document: (1) English language development defined as instruction designed specifically for limited-English-proficient  
ELAM3Rstudents to develop their listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills in English; and (2) specially designed content    
ELAM4Rinstruction delivered in English defined as instruction in a subject area, delivered in English, that is specially designed  
ELAM5Rto meet the needs of limited-English-proficient students. This English learner authorization also covers classes taught on   
ELAM6Rthe basis of other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held within the settings or content/specialty area(s) listed  
ELAM7Rat the grade or age levels authorized.                                                                                       
ELAP1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners in the settings and content area(s) specified on    
ELAP2Rthis document: (1) English language development defined as instruction designed specifically for limited-English-proficient  
ELAP3Rstudents to develop their listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills in English; and specially designed content        
ELAP4Rinstruction delivered in English defined as instruction in a subject area, delivered in English, that is specially designed  
ELAP5Rto meet the needs of limited-English-proficient students. This English learner authorization also covers classes taught on   
ELAP6Rthe basis of other valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held within the settings or content/specialty area(s) listed  
ELAP7Rat the grade or age levels authorized.                                                                                       
ELAS1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners within the content area(s) listed on this document: 
ELAS2R(1) English language development defined as instruction designed specifically for limited-English-proficient students to     
ELAS3Rdevelop their listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills in English; and (2) specially designed content instruction    
ELAS4Rdelivered in English defined as instruction in a subject area, delivered in English, that is specially designed to meet the  
ELAS5Rneeds of limited-English-proficient students. This English learner authorization also covers classes taught on the basis of  
ELAS6Rother valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held within the settings or content/specialty area(s) listed at the grade  
ELAS7Ror age levels authorized.                                                                                                    
ELD 1LEnglish Language Development                                                                                                 
FABA1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners limited to the grades authorized by the intern      
FABA2Rcredential: (1) instruction for English language development; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in        
FABA3Rin the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
FABA4Ri in the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; and (4) instruction for primary language development in  
FABA5Rthe language of Farsi.                                                                                                       
FIBA1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners limited to the grades authorized by the intern      
FIBA2Rcredential: (1) instruction for English language development; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in        
FIBA3Rin the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
FIBA4RFilipino in the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; and (4) instruction for primary language          
FIBA5R development in the language of Filipino.                                                                                    
FRBA1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners limited to the grades authorized by the intern      
FRBA2Rcredential: (1) instruction for English language development; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in        
FRBA3Rin the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
FRBA4RFrench in the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; and (4) instruction for primary language            
FRBA5R development in the language of French.                                                                                      
G1  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach in grades kindergarten through three, except in subjects or areas where       
G1  2Gspecial preparation or certification has been established and is required, such as special education and library services.   
G2  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach in grades kindergarten through eight, except in subjects or areas where       
G2  2Gspecial preparation or certification has been established and is required, such as special education.                        
G3  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach in grades seven, eight and nine, except in subjects or areas where special    
G3  2Gpreparation or certification has been established and is required, such as special education and library services.           
G4  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach in grades thirteen and fourteen, except in subjects or areas where special    
G4  2Gpreparation or certification has been established and is required, such as special education and library services.           
G5  1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach in the grades indicated, except in subjects or areas where special            
G5  2G or certification has been established and is required, such as special education.                                           
GRBA1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners limited to the grades authorized by the intern      
GRBA2Rcredential: (1) instruction for English language development; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in        
GRBA3Rin the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
GRBA4RGerman in the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; and (4) instruction for primary language            
GRBA5R development in the language of German.                                                                                      
HMBA1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners limited to the grades authorized by the intern      
HMBA2Rcredential: (1) instruction for English language development; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in        
HMBA3Rin the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
HMBA4Rg in the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; and (4) instruction for primary language development in  
HMBA5Rthe language of Hmong.                                                                                                       
INTR1RThis individual has completed the intern preservice preparation, which included specific instructions on the teaching of     
INTR2REnglish learners, and is participating in a Commission approved intern preparation program.  The individual must be          
INTR3Rby both the Commission approved program and the employer in the area(s) listed and in his/her work with English learners,    
INTR4R and must make satisfactory progress toward program completion for the duration of the intern credential.                    
JABA1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners limited to the grades authorized by the intern      
JABA2Rcredential: (1) instruction for English language development; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in        
JABA3Rin the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
JABA4RJapanese in the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; and (4) instruction for primary language          
JABA5R development in the language of Japanese.                                                                                    
KMBA1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners limited to the grades authorized by the intern      
KMBA2Rcredential: (1) instruction for English language development; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in        
KMBA3Rin the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
KMBA4Rr in the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; and (4) instruction for primary language development in  
KMBA5Rthe language of Khmer.                                                                                                       
KOBA1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners limited to the grades authorized by the intern      
KOBA2Rcredential: (1) instruction for English language development; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in        
KOBA3Rin the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
KOBA4RKorean in the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; and (4) instruction for primary language            
KOBA5R development in the language of Korean.                                                                                      
LSCA1RThe Special Class Authorization authorizes the holder to conduct Educational Assessments related to students' access to the  
LSCA2Racademic core curriculum and progress towards meeting instructional academic goals, provide instruction and Special          
LSCA3R Support to teach students with disabilities in which the primary disabilities of "speech or language impairment" as defined 
LSCA4Rin subsection 300.8(c)(11) of Title 34 Code of Federal Regulations, Subpart A and "autism" as defined in subsection          
LSCA5R300.8(c)(1) (autistic) of Title 34 Code of Federal Regulations, Subpart A, to students from birth through age 22 in services 
LSCA6Racross the continuum of program options available found in Section 80048.6(a)(1).                                            
LSH 1RThis Speech-Language Pathology Services Credential in Language, Speech and Hearing authorizes the holder to conduct          
LSH 2RSpeech, and Hearing Assessments and provide Educational Services, provide specific learning disability area services         
LSH 3Rd to speech and language, and special education services to individuals with language and speech impairments across the      
LSH 4Rspecial education disability areas, to students from birth through age 22 in services across the continuum of program        
LSH 5R available found in Section 80048.9.3.                                                                                       
MABA1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners limited to the grades authorized by the intern      
MABA2Rcredential: (1) instruction for English language development; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in        
MABA3Rin the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
MABA4RMandarin in the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; and (4) instruction for primary language          
MABA5R development in the language of Mandarin.                                                                                    
MIA11RThis document authorizes the holder to: (1) teach mathematics in grades twelve and below, including preschool and classes    
MIA12Rorganized primarily for adults, in mathematics content typically included in curriculum guidelines and textbooks up to and   
MIA13Rincluding pre-Algebra; and  (2) develop and coordinate mathematics curriculum; coach mathematics teachers; design and        
MIA14Rimplement intensive mathematics interventions; teach teachers to effectively intervene, accommodate, and differentiate their 
MIA15Rmathematics instruction to increase student engagement and proficiency in mathematics; and develop programs and deliver      
MIA16R development for mathematics education programs at the school site level.                                                    
MIA21RThis document authorizes the holder to: (1) teach mathematics in grades twelve and below, including preschool and classes    
MIA22Rorganized primarily for adults, in mathematics content typically included in curriculum guidelines and textbooks up to and   
MIA23Rincluding Algebra I; and (2) develop and coordinate mathematics curriculum; coach mathematics teachers; design and implement 
MIA24Rintensive mathematics interventions; teach teachers to effectively intervene, accommodate, and differentiate their           
MIA25Rmathematics instruction to increase student engagement and proficiency in mathematics; and develop programs and deliver      
MIA26R  development for mathematics education programs at the school site level.                                                   
MIL11RThis document authorizes the holder to: (1) teach mathematics in grades twelve and below, including preschool and classes    
MIL12Rorganized primarily for adults, in mathematics content typically included in curriculum guidelines and textbooks up to and   
MIL13Rincluding pre-Algebra; and (2) develop and coordinate mathematics curriculum; coach mathematics teachers; design and         
MIL14Rimplement intensive mathematics interventions; teach teachers to effectively intervene, accommodate, and differentiate their 
MIL15Rmathematics instruction to increase student engagement and proficiency in mathematics; provide leadership in selecting the   
MIL16Rmathematics  curricula and in developing a district-, county-, or state-wide cadre of mathematics teacher leaders; analyze   
MIL17Rand use data to restructure school and district mathematics programs to increase students' college-readiness; and develop    
MIL18Rprograms and deliver staff development for mathematics education programs coordinated by school districts and county offices 
MIL19Rof education.                                                                                                                
MIL21RThis document authorizes the holder to: (1) teach mathematics in grades twelve and below, including preschool and classes    
MIL22Rorganized primarily for adults, in mathematics content typically included in curriculum guidelines and textbooks up to and   
MIL23Rincluding Algebra I; and (2) develop and coordinate mathematics curriculum; coach mathematics teachers; design and implement 
MIL24Rintensive mathematics interventions; teach teachers to effectively intervene, accommodate, and differentiate their           
MIL25Rmathematics instruction to increase student engagement and proficiency in mathematics; provide leadership in selecting the   
MIL26Rmathematics  curricula and in developing a district-, county-, or state-wide cadre of mathematics teacher leaders; analyze   
MIL27Rand use data to restructure school and district mathematics programs to increase students' college-readiness; and develop    
MIL28Rprograms and deliver staff development for mathematics education programs coordinated by school districts and county offices 
MIL29Rof education.                                                                                                                
P30 1RThis permit authorizes the holder to serve as a substitute teacher for not more than thirty days for any one teacher during  
P30 2Ra school year in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.  The holder    
P30 3Rserve on this permit in any county in which the document is registered provided the employing agency has a statement of      
P30 4Rd on file for the school year.                                                                                               
P30B1RThis permit authorizes the holder to serve as a substitute teacher for not more than thirty days for any one teacher during  
P30B2Ra school year in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.  Service is    
P30B3Rlimited to the employing agency listed, provided the employing agency has a statement of need on file for the school year.   
P30C1RThis permit authorizes the holder to serve as a substitute teacher for not more than thirty days for any one teacher during  
P30C2Ra school year in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.  Service is    
P30C3Rlimited to employing agencies which have a statement of need on file for the school year and an approved waiver for the      
P30C4R skills requirement.                                                                                                         
P30V1RThis permit authorizes the holder to serve as a substitute in any classroom in any county in which the permit is registered  
P30V2Rprovided the employing agency has a completed Statement of Need.  Such substitute teaching shall be part of a program of     
P30V3Rtechnical, trade or vocational education.  However, the holder shall not serve as a substitute for more than 30 days for any 
P30V4Rone teacher during the school year.                                                                                          
P3VI1RContact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
P60 1RThis permit authorizes the holder to serve as a substitute teacher in any classroom in preschool, kindergarten and in grades 
P60 2R1-12, inclusive, or in classes organized primarily for adults.  The holder may serve as a substitute for not more than sixty 
P60 3Rdays for any one teacher during the school year.                                                                             
P90 1RThis permit authorizes the holder to serve as a substitute teacher in any classroom in preschool, kindergarten and grades    
P90 2R1-12, inclusive, or in classes organized primarily for adults.  The holder may serve as a substitute for not more than       
P90 3R days for any one teacher and not more than ninety days total during the school year.                                        
PD121RThis credential authorizes the holder to perform the following services in grades 12 and below, including preschool, and     
PD122Rprograms organized primarily for adults who are enrolled in state special schools or who are in special classes for pupils   
PD123Rwith hearing impairments: assess home, school, personal and community factors that may affect a student's learning; identify 
PD124Rand provide intervention strategies for children and their families, including counseling, case management, and crisis       
PD125Rintervention; consult with teachers, administrators and other school staff regarding social and emotional needs of students; 
PD126Rand coordinate family, school and community resources on behalf of students.                                                 
PK3 1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach all subjects in a self-contained general education classroom setting and, as  
PK3 2Ra self-contained classroom teacher, to team teach or to regroup students across classrooms, in preschool through grade       
POBA1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners limited to the grades authorized by the intern      
POBA2Rcredential: (1) instruction for English language development; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in        
POBA3Rin the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
POBA4RPortuguese in the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; and (4) instruction for primary language        
POBA5R development in the language of Portuguese.                                                                                  
PRDF1RThis document authorizes the holder to serve deaf and hearing-impaired pupils who are enrolled in state special schools or   
PRDF2R special classes for pupils with hearing impairments.                                                                        
PUBA1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners limited to the grades authorized by the intern      
PUBA2Rcredential: (1) instruction for English language development; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in        
PUBA3Rin the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
PUBA4RPunjabi in the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; and (4) instruction for primary language           
PUBA5R development in the language of Punjabi.                                                                                     
R1  1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach single-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses within the authorized field or 
R1  2Rfields listed in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.                
R10 1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach multiple-subject-matter (self-contained) classes in grades kindergarten       
R10 2Rthrough eight.                                                                                                               
R1041RThis document authorizes the holder to provide the following services to English learners in grades kindergarten through     
R1042Reight: (1) instruction for English language development; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in  
R1043Rmultiple-subject-matter (self-contained) classes; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of emphasis listed in    
R1044Rmultiple-subject-matter (self-contained) classes and; (4) instruction for primary language development in the language of    
R1045Remphasis listed.                                                                                                             
R10B1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach English as a Second Language in grades kindergarten through eight; and to     
R10B2Rteach multiple-subject-matter (self-contained) classes to limited-English proficient and non-English proficient students in  
R10B3Rthe language of bilingual crosscultural emphasis listed or in English language development programs in grades kindergarten   
R10B4Rthrough eight.                                                                                                               
R10C1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach all subjects in a self-contained general education classroom setting and, as  
R10C2Ra self-contained classroom teacher, to team teach or to regroup students across classrooms, in preschool through grade       
R10E1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach all subjects in grades kindergarten through eight in a self-contained class,    
R10E2Ra self-contained classroom teacher, to team teach or to regroup students across classrooms, and to teach any of the core     
R10E3Rsubjects he or she is teaching to single group of students in the same grade level as the core for less than fifty percent   
R10E4Rof his or her work day, and to teach core classes consisting of two or more subjects to the same group of students in        
R10E5Rs five through eight.  In addition, this document authorizes the holder to provide English learners instruction for English  
R10E6Rlanguage development, and specially designed content instruction delivered in English in multiple-subject-mater              
R10E7R(self-contained) classes in grades kindergarten through eight.                                                               
R10L1RThis document authorizes the holder to provide the following services to limited-English-proficient pupils in grades         
R10L2Rkindergarten through eight: (1) instruction for English language development; (2) specially designed content instruction     
R10L3Rdelivered in English in multiple-subject-matter (self-contained) classes; (3) content instruction delivered in the language  
R10L4Rof emphasis listed above in multiple-subject-matter (self-contained) classes; and (4) instruction for primary language       
R10L5Rdevelopment in the language of emphasis listed.                                                                              
R10M1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach all subjects in a self-contained class and, as a self-contained classroom     
R10M2Rteacher, to team teach or to regroup students across classrooms, in grades kindergarten through eight.  In addition, this    
R10M3Rcredential authorizes the holder to teach core classes consisting of two or more subjects to the same group of students in   
R10M4Rgrades five through eight, and to teach any of the core subjects he or she is teaching to a single group of students in the  
R10M5Rsame grade level as the core for less than fifty percent of his or her work day.                                             
R10P1RIn addition, this document authorizes the holder to provide content instruction delivered in the language of emphasis listed 
R10P2Rin multiple-subject-matter (self-contained) classes and instruction for primary language development in the language of      
R10P3Remphasis listed to English learners in grades kindergarten through eight.                                                    
R10S1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach individuals with mild and moderate disabilities in grades kindergarten through  
R10S2Rtwelve and in classes organized primarily for adults, but ONLY in the second or subsequent school years that the holder      
R10S3Rserves on a District Intern Credential.  The holder must teach for one complete school year as authorized by the statement   
R10S4Rlisted before beginning service on this authorization.                                                                       
R10T1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach individuals with mild and moderate disabilities in grades kindergarten through  
R10T2Rtwelve and in classes organized primarily for adults.                                                                        
R10U1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach individuals with moderate and severe disabilities in grades kindergarten        
R10U2R twelve and in classes organized primarily for adults.                                                                       
R10V1RThis document authorizes the holder to provide educational services to children from birth through pre-kindergarten who are  
R10V2Religible for early intervention special education and related services under federal and state law, except children with a   
R10V3Rprimary disability of deafness, hearing impairment, deaf-blindness, visual impairment including blindness, orthopedic        
R10V4Rimpairment, and traumatic brain injury, across the continuum of program options available pursuant to Education Code Section 
R10V5R56031, 56360, and 56361.  The continuum includes: regular classrooms; resource rooms; special day classrooms; special        
R10V6Rschools; home/hospital settings; correctional facilities; non-public, non-sectarian schools and agencies; and alternative    
R10V7Rinstructional settings other than classrooms.                                                                                
R1421RThis document authorizes the holder to provide the following services to English learners: (1) instruction for English       
R1422Rlanguage development in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults; and (2) 
R1423Rspecially designed content instruction delivered in English in single-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses as           
R1424Ron this document.  This authorization also covers classes authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials held, as      
R1425R specified in Education Code Section 44253.3.                                                                                
R1591RThis document authorizes the holder to provide the following services to English learners: (1) instruction for English       
R1592Rlanguage development in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults; and (2) 
R1593Rspecially designed content instruction delivered in English in single-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses as           
R1594Ron this document.  This authorization also covers classes authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials held, as      
R1595R specified in Education Code Section 44253.3.                                                                                
R1A 1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the specific subject or subjects listed as supplementary authorizations in    
R1A 2Rgrades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults, unless specific grade           
R1A 3Rrestrictions are indicated next to the subject.                                                                              
R1B 1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach (in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized    
R1B 2Gprimarily for adults) the subject matter content for the introductory subject or subjects listed as supplementary            
R1B 3Gauthorizations which is typically included for that subject in curriculum guidelines and textbooks for study in grades nine  
R1B 4Gand below.                                                                                                                   
R1B 1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach (in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized    
R1B 2Rprimarily for adults) the subject matter content for the introductory subject or subjects listed as supplementary            
R1B 3Rauthorizations which is typically included for that subject in curriculum guidelines and textbooks for study in grades nine  
R1B 4Rand below.                                                                                                                   
R1B41RThis document authorizes the holder to provide the following services to English learners: (1) instruction for English       
R1B42Rlanguage development in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults; (2)     
R1B43Rspecially designed content instruction delivered in English in single-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses as           
R1B44Ron this document; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of emphasis listed in single-subject-matter              
R1B45R(departmentalized) courses as authorized on this document; and (4) instruction for primary language development in the       
R1B46R language of emphasis listed in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. 
R1B47RThis bilingual, crosscultural, language and academic development authorization also covers classes authorized by other       
R1B48Rd non-emergency credentials held, as specified in Education Code Section 44253.4.                                            
R1B51RThis document authorizes the holder to provide the following services to English learners: (1) instruction for English       
R1B52Rlanguage development in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults; (2)     
R1B53Rspecially designed content instruction delivered in English in single-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses as           
R1B54Ron this document; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of emphasis listed in single-subject-matter              
R1B55R(departmentalized) courses as authorized on this document; and (4) instruction for primary language development in the       
R1B56Rlanguage of emphasis listed above in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and classes organized primarily for       
R1B57Radults.  This bilingual, crosscultural, language and academic development authorization also covers classes authorized by    
R1B58R other valid, non-emergency credentials held, as specified in Education Code Section 44253.4.                                
R1BE1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach English as a Second Language in grades twelve and below, including preschool, 
R1BE2Rand in classes organized primarily for adults; and to teach single-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses as authorized   
R1BE3Rthis document to limited-English proficient and non-English proficient students in the language of bilingual crosscultural   
R1BE4R emphasis listed or in English language development programs.                                                                
R1BL1RThis document authorizes the holder to provide the following services to limited-English-proficient pupils:  (1) instruction 
R1BL2Rfor English language development in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for     
R1BL3Radults; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in single-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses  
R1BL4Ras authorized on this document; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of emphasis listed in                      
R1BL5R(departmentalized) courses as authorized on this document; and (4) instruction for primary language development in the       
R1BL6R language of emphasis listed in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. 
R1BL7RThis bilingual, crosscultural, language and academic development authorization also covers classes authorized by other       
R1BL8R valid, non-emergency credentials held, as specified in Education Code Section 44253.4.                                      
R1CL1RThis credential authorizes the holder to provide the following services to limited-English-proficient pupils:  (1)           
R1CL2Rinstruction for English language development in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized       
R1CL3Rprimarily for adults; and (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in single-subject-matter           
R1CL4R(departmentalized) courses as authorized on this document.  This crosscultural, language and academic development            
R1CL5Rauthorization also covers classes authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials held, as specified in Education Code  
R1CL6RSection 44253.3.                                                                                                             
R1D 1RThis credential, issued under the authority of Education Code Section 44258.7(a), Chapter 1376 of the Statutes of 1987,      
R1D 2Rauthorizes the holder to teach the specific subject or subjects listed as supplementary authorizations in grades seven       
R1D 3Rthrough twelve unless specific grade restrictions are indicated next to the subject.                                         
R1E 1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach in the specific science area listed on the document in grades twelve and below, 
R1E 2Rincluding preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.                                                          
R1EE1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach in the specific science area listed on the document in grades twelve and below, 
R1EE2Rincluding preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults; provide English learners instruction for English         
R1EE3Rdevelopment and specially designed content instruction delivered in English in single-subject matter (departmentalized)      
R1EE4Rcourses as authorized on this document in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily   
R1EE5R for adults.                                                                                                                 
R1EL1RIn addition, this document authorizes the holder to provide English learners content instruction delivered in the language   
R1EL2Remphasis listed in single-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses as authorized on this document; and instruction for      
R1EL3Rprimary language development in the language of emphasis listed above in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and   
R1EL4R in classes organized primarily for adults.                                                                                  
R1F 1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach the content areas in general mathematics, algebra, geometry, probability and    
R1F 2Rstatistics, and consumer mathematics in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for 
R1F 3Radults.                                                                                                                      
R1FE1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach the content areas in general mathematics, algebra, geometry, probability and    
R1FE2Rstatistics, and consumer mathematics in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for 
R1FE3Radults; provide English learners instruction for English language development and specially designed content instruction     
R1FE4Rdelivered in English in single-subject matter (departmentalized) courses as authorized on this document in grades twelve and 
R1FE5Rbelow, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.                                                   
R1G 1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach in the specific science area listed on the document in grades twelve and below, 
R1G 2Rincluding preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.                                                          
R1GE1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach in the specific science area listed on the document in grades twelve and below, 
R1GE2Rincluding preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults; provide English learners instruction for English         
R1GE3Rdevelopment and specially designed content instruction delivered in English in single-subject matter (departmentalized)      
R1GE4Rcourses as authorized on this document in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily   
R1GE5R for adults.                                                                                                                 
R1GS1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach introductory and general science, introductory life science, and introductory   
R1GS2Rphysical science in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults; and         
R1GS3Rintegrated science in grades preschool, and kindergarten through eight.                                                      
R1H 1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach in the specific science area listed on the document in grades twelve and below, 
R1H 2Rincluding preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.                                                          
R1HE1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach in the specific science area listed on the document in grades twelve and below, 
R1HE2Rincluding preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults; provide English learners instruction for English         
R1HE3Rdevelopment and specially designed content instruction delivered in English in single-subject matter (departmentalized)      
R1HE4Rcourses as authorized on this document in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily   
R1HE5R for adults.                                                                                                                 
R1L 1RThe holder of this Limited Assignment Authorization may be assigned, with his or her consent, to teach the subject or        
R1L 2Rsubjects listed in the grades indicated.                                                                                     
R1P 1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach in the specific science area listed on the document in grades twelve and below, 
R1P 2Rincluding preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.                                                          
R1PE1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach in the specific science area listed on the document in grades twelve and below, 
R1PE2Rincluding preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults; provide English learners instruction for English         
R1PE3Rdevelopment and specially designed content instruction delivered in English in single-subject matter (departmentalized)      
R1PE4Rcourses as authorized on this document in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily   
R1PE5R for adults.                                                                                                                 
R1S 1GThis document authorizes the holder to teach the subject area(s) listed in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and 
R1S 2Gin classes organized primarily for adults.                                                                                   
R1S 1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach the subject area(s) listed in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and 
R1S 2Rin classes organized primarily for adults.                                                                                   
R1WL1RThis document authorizes the holder to provide departmentalized instruction in English language development designed         
R1WL2Rspecifically for limited-English-proficient students to develop their listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills in    
R1WL3REnglish in grades twelve and below, including preschool and in classes organized primarily for adults. This document also    
R1WL4Rauthorizes the following instruction within any content area(s) listed on this document and classes taught on the basis of   
R1WL5Rother valid, non-emergency credentials or permits held within the settings or content/specialty area(s) listed at the grade  
R1WL6Ror age levels authorized: (1) English language development designed specifically for limited-English-proficient students to  
R1WL7Rdevelop their listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills in English; and (2) specially designed content instruction    
R1WL8Rdelivered in English defined as instruction in a content area, delivered in English, that is specially designed to meet the  
R1WL9Rneeds of limited-English-proficient students.                                                                                
R2  1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach multiple-subject-matter (self-contained) classes in grades twelve and below,    
R2  2Rincluding preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.                                                          
R2101RThis document authorizes the holder to provide the following services to English learners: (1) instruction for English       
R2102Rlanguage development; and (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in multiple-subject-matter         
R2103R(self-contained) classes in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.     
R2421RThis document authorizes the holder to provide the following services to English learners: (1) instruction for English       
R2422Rlanguage development in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults; and (2) 
R2423Rspecially designed content instruction delivered in English in multiple-subject-matter (self-contained) classes, or          
R2424Rsingle-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses as authorized by any supplementary authorization listed.  This              
R2425Ralso covers classes authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials held, as specified in Education Code Section        
R2426R 44253.3.                                                                                                                    
R2591RThis document authorizes the holder to provide the following services to English learners: (1) instruction for English       
R2592Rlanguage development in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults; and (2) 
R2593Rspecially designed content instruction delivered in English in multiple-subject-matter (self-contained) classes, or          
R2594Rsingle-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses as authorized by any supplementary authorization listed.  This              
R2595Ralso covers classes authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials held, as specified in Education Code Section        
R2596R 44253.3.                                                                                                                    
R2A 1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach single-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses within the field of the      
R2A 2Rsupplementary authorization listed in grades six, seven, eight, and nine.                                                    
R2AB1RThis document authorizes the holder to provide the following services to English learners: (1) instruction for English       
R2AB2Rlanguage development in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults; (2)     
R2AB3Rspecially designed content instruction delivered in English in multiple-subject-matter (self-contained) classes; (3) content 
R2AB4Rdelivered in the language of emphasis listed in multiple-subject-matter (self-contained) classes; and (4) instruction for    
R2AB5Rprimary language development in the language of emphasis listed in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in      
R2AB6Rclasses organized primarily for adults.  This bilingual, crosscultural, language and academic development authorization also 
R2AB7Rcovers classes authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials held, as specified in Education Code Section 44253.4.    
R2B 1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach single-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses within the field of the      
R2B 2Rsupplementary authorization listed in grades nine and below.                                                                 
R2B41RThis document authorizes the holder to provide the following services to English learners: (1) instruction for English       
R2B42Rlanguage development in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults; (2)     
R2B43Rspecially designed content instruction delivered in English in multiple-subject-matter (self-contained) classes, or          
R2B44Rsingle-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses as authorized by any supplementary authorization listed; (3) content        
R2B45Rinstruction delivered in the language of emphasis listed in multiple-subject-matter (self-contained) classes, or             
R2B46Rsingle-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses as authorized by any supplementary authorization listed; and (4)            
R2B47R for primary language development in the language of emphasis listed in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in 
R2B48Rclasses organized primarily for adults.  This bilingual, crosscultural, language and academic development authorization also 
R2B49Rcovers classes authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials held, as specified in Education Code Section 44253.4.    
R2B51RThis document authorizes the holder to provide the following services to English learners: (1) instruction for English       
R2B52Rlanguage development in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults; and (2) 
R2B53Rspecially designed content instruction delivered in English in multiple-subject-matter (self-contained) classes, or          
R2B54Rsingle-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses as authorized by any supplementary authorization listed; (3) content        
R2B55Rinstruction delivered in the language of emphasis listed in multiple-subject-matter (self-contained) classes, or             
R2B56Rsingle-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses as authorized by any supplementary authorization listed; and (4)            
R2B57R for primary language development in the language of emphasis listed in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in 
R2B58Rclasses organized primarily for adults.  This bilingual, crosscultural, language and academic development authorization also 
R2B59Rcovers classes authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials held, as specified in Education Code Section 44253.3.    
R2BC1RThis document authorizes the holder to provide the following services to English learners: (1) instruction for English       
R2BC2Rlanguage development in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults; (2)     
R2BC3Rspecially designed content instruction delivered in English in multiple-subject-matter (self-contained) classes, or          
R2BC4Rsingle-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses as authorized by any supplementary authorization listed; (3) content        
R2BC5Rinstruction delivered in the language of emphasis listed in multiple-subject-matter (self-contained) classes, or             
R2BC6Rsingle-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses as authorized by any supplementary authorization listed; and (4)            
R2BC7R for primary language development in the language of emphasis listed in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in 
R2BC8Rclasses organized primarily for adults.  This bilingual, crosscultural, language and academic development authorization also 
R2BC9Rcovers classes authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials held, as specified in Education Code Section 44253.4.    
R2BE1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach English as a Second Language in grades twelve and below, including preschool, 
R2BE2Rand in classes organized primarily for adults; and to teach multiple-subject-matter (self-contained) classes, or single-     
R2BE3Rsubject-matter (departmentalized) courses as authorized by any supplementary authorization listed, to limited-English        
R2BE4Rproficient and non-English proficient students in the language of bilingual crosscultural emphasis listed or in English      
R2BE5Rlanguage development programs.                                                                                               
R2BL1RThis document authorizes the holder to provide the following services to limited-English-proficient pupils:  (1) instruction 
R2BL2Rfor English language development in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for     
R2BL3Radults; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in multiple-subject-matter (self-contained) classes, 
R2BL4Ror single-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses as authorized by any supplementary authorization listed; (3)content      
R2BL5Rinstruction delivered in the language of emphasis listed in multiple-subject-matter (self-contained) classes, or             
R2BL6Rsingle-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses as authorized by any supplementary authorization listed; and (4)            
R2BL7R for primary language development in the language of emphasis listed in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in 
R2BL8Rclasses organized primarily for adults.  This bilingual, crosscultural, language and academic development authorization also 
R2BL9Rcovers classes authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials held, as specified in Education Code Section 44253.4.    
R2C 1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the specific subject or subjects listed as supplementary authorizations in    
R2C 2R grade or grades indicated in parenthesis following the subject.                                                             
R2CL1RThis credential authorizes the holder to provide the following services to limited-English-proficient pupils:  (1)           
R2CL2Rinstruction for English language development in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized       
R2CL3Rprimarily for adults; and (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in multiple-subject-matter         
R2CL4R(self-contained) classes, or single-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses as authorized by any supplementary             
R2CL5Rauthorization listed. This crosscultural, language and academic development authorization also covers classes authorized by  
R2CL6Rother valid, non-emergency credentials held, as specified in Education Code Section 44253.3.                                 
R2E 1RIn addition, this document authorizes the holder to provide English learners instruction for primary language development in 
R2E 2Rthe language of emphasis listed in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for      
R2E 3Radults and content instruction delivered in the language of emphasis listed in multiple-subject-matter (self-contained)      
R2E 4Rclasses.                                                                                                                     
R2EL1RIn addition, this document authorizes the holder to provide English learners instruction for primary language development in 
R2EL2Rthe language of emphasis listed in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for      
R2EL3Radults and content instruction delivered in the language of emphasis listed in multiple-subject-matter (self-contained)      
R2EL4Rclasses, or single-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses as authorized by any supplementary authorization listed in      
R2EL5Rgrades nine and below.                                                                                                       
R2LA1RThis document authorizes the holder to provide the following services to English learners (1) instruction for English        
R2LA2Rlanguage development in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults; and (2) 
R2LA3Rspecially designed content instruction delivered in English in multiple-subject-matter (self-contained) classes or           
R2LA4Rsingle-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses as authorized by any supplementary authorization listed.  This              
R2LA5Rcrosscultural, language and academic development authorization also covers classes authorized by other valid, non-emergency  
R2LA6Rcredentials as specified in Education Code Section 44253.3.                                                                  
R2M 1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach all subjects in a self-contained class and, as a self-contained classroom     
R2M 2Rteacher, to team teach or to regroup students across classrooms, in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in     
R2M 3Rclasses organized primarily for adults.  In addition, this credential authorizes the holder to teach core classes consisting 
R2M 4Rof two or more subjects to the same group of students in grades five through eight, and to teach any of the core subjects he 
R2M 5Ror she is teaching to a single group of students in the same grade level as the core for less than fifty percent of his or   
R2M 6Rher work day.                                                                                                                
R3  1RContact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
R3591RThis document authorizes the holder to provide the following services to English learners: (1) instruction for English       
R3592Rlanguage development in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized for adults; and (2) specially 
R3593Rdesigned academic instruction in English within the subject area and grade level authorization of this document.  This       
R3594Rauthorization also covers classes authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials held, as specified in Education Code  
R3595RSection 44253.3.                                                                                                             
R3A 1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach single-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses in the field of agriculture  
R3A 2Rin grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.                              
R3A11RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach agriculture in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes   
R3A12Rorganized primarily for adults.  It also authorizes the holder to develop and coordinate curriculum, develop programs, and   
R3A13Rdeliver staff development for agriculture education programs coordinated by school districts or county offices of education. 
R3B 1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach English as a Second Language in grades twelve and below, including preschool, 
R3B 2Rand in classes organized primarily for adults; and to teach single-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses and multiple-   
R3B 3Rsubject-matter (self-contained) classes to limited-English proficient and non-English proficient students in the target      
R3B 4Rlanguage listed or in English language development programs, in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes 
R3B 5Rorganized primarily for adults.                                                                                              
R3BC1RThis authorizes the holder to perform all services authorized by the Education Specialist Instruction Credential: Early      
R3BC2RChildhood Special Education that are not otherwise authorized by their existing Early Childhood Special Education            
R3BC3Rincluding the authorization to provide instruction in transitional kindergarten and kindergarten classes for students with   
R3BC4R disabilities.                                                                                                               
R3BE1RThis authorizes the holder to perform all services authorized by the Education Specialist Instruction Credential: Extensive  
R3BE2RSupport Needs that are not otherwise authorized by their existing Moderate/Severe Disabilities Education Specialist          
R3BE3RCredential.                                                                                                                  
R3BM1RThis authorizes the holder to perform all services authorized by the Education Specialist Instruction Credential: Mild to    
R3BM2RModerate Support Needs that are not otherwise authorized by their existing Mild/Moderate Disabilities Education Specialist   
R3BM3RCredential.                                                                                                                  
R3C 1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach multiple-subject-matter (self-contained) classes in early childhood education 
R3C 2Rand to teach single-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses in the subject of early childhood education in grades twelve   
R3C 3Rand below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.                                               
R3C11RThis credential authorizes the holder to develop and coordinate curriculum, develop programs and deliver staff development   
R3C12Rincluding age appropriate teaching methodologies for child development programs and early childhood education programs in    
R3C13Rgrades three and below which are coordinated by school districts or county offices of education.  This credential also       
R3C14Rauthorizes teaching courses in child development in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized   
R3C15Rprimarily for adults.                                                                                                        
R3CE1RThe holder of this Certificate of Eligibility has completed the college or university program and all other requirements for 
R3CE2Rthe Preliminary Level I Education Specialist Instruction Credential and is authorized to seek employment in a position       
R3CE3Rproviding direct instruction to special education students as specified in the authorization statement.  The Preliminary     
R3CE4RLevel I Credential will be issued when the holder submits (1) verification of employment in a appropriate position on a form 
R3CE5Rprovided by the Commission, and (2) an application form and appropriate fee to the Commission on Teacher Credentialing.  The 
R3CE6Rfee for the Preliminary Level I Credential has been established at one-half of the application fee in effect at the time the 
R3CE7Rapplication is submitted.                                                                                                    
R3CH1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach handicapped children in a special class in which the primary disability is      
R3CH2R"speech and language impaired" or "deaf" or "deaf-blind" or "hard-of-hearing" as defined in subsection 300.5 of Title 34 of  
R3CH3Rthe Code of Federal Regulations, Subpart A, in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized        
R3CH4Rprimarily for adults.                                                                                                        
R3CL1RThis document authorizes the holder to provide the following services to limited-English-proficient pupils: (1) instruction  
R3CL2Rfor English language development in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in the classes organized primarily for 
R3CL3Radults; and (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in special education classrooms in the area of   
R3CL4Rspecialization listed on this document.  This crosscultural, language and academic development authorization also covers     
R3CL5Rclasses authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials held, as specified in Education Code Section 44253.3.           
R3CO1RThe holder of this Certificate of Eligibility has completed the requirements for the two-year Preliminary Level I Education  
R3CO2RSpecialist Credential and is authorized to seek employment in a position providing direct instruction to special education   
R3CO3Rstudents as specified in the authorization statement.  The two-year Preliminary Level I Education Specialist Credential will 
R3CO4Rbe issued when the holder submits (1) verification of employment in an appropriate position on a form provided by the        
R3CO5RCommission, and (2) an application form and appropriate fee to the Commission on Teacher Credentialing.  The fee for the     
R3CO6Rtwo-year Preliminary Level I Credential has been established at one-half of the application fee in effect at the time the    
R3CO7Rapplication is submitted.                                                                                                    
R3D 1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach single-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses and multiple-subject-matter  
R3D 2R(self-contained) classes in programs for the gifted in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes          
R3D 3R primarily for adults.                                                                                                       
R3D11RThis credential authorizes the holder to develop and coordinate curriculum, develop programs, and deliver staff development  
R3D12Rfor gifted education programs coordinated by school districts and county offices of education.                               
R3DH1RThis authorizes the holder to conduct Educational Assessments related to students' access to the academic core curriculum    
R3DH2Rprogress towards meeting instructional academic goals, provide instruction, and Special Education Support to individuals     
R3DH3Rwith a primary or secondary disability of deaf or hard-of-hearing or deaf-blind and services to students with a hearing      
R3DH4Rs that manifests itself in conjunction with additional disabilities including unilateral or bilateral, whether fluctuating,  
R3DH5Rconductive, sensorineural, and/or auditory neuropathy, to students from birth through age 22, and classes organized          
R3DH6R for adults in services across the continuum of program options available.                                                   
R3E 1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach single-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses in the field of health       
R3E 2Rscience in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.                      
R3E11RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach health science in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in        
R3E12Rorganized primarily for adults.  It also authorizes the holder to develop and coordinate curriculum, develop programs, and   
R3E13Rdeliver staff development for health science education programs coordinated by school districts and county offices of        
R3E14R education.                                                                                                                  
R3EC1RThis authorizes the holder to conduct Educational Assessments related to student's access to the academic core curriculum    
R3EC2Rprogress towards meeting instructional academic goals, and provide instructional and Special Education Support to students   
R3EC3Rfrom birth through pre-kindergarten who are eligible for early intervention special education and related services, to       
R3EC4R individuals with a primary disability in specific learning disabilities, mild/moderate intellectual disabilities, traumatic 
R3EC5Rbrain injury, other health impairment, autism, moderate/severe intellectual disabilities, emotional disturbance, and         
R3EC6Rdisabilities including developmental delay and a disabling medical condition in services across the continuum of program     
R3EC7R options available.                                                                                                          
R3EN1RThis authorizes the holder to conduct Educational Assessments related to students' access to the academic curriculum and     
R3EN2Rprogress towards meeting instructional goals, provide instruction, and Special Education Support to students with extensive  
R3EN3Rsupport needs related to one or more of the following disabilities: autism, deafblind, emotional disturbance, intellectual   
R3EN4Rdisability, multiple disabilities, orthopedic impairment, other health impairment, specific learning disability, and         
R3EN5Rtraumatic brain injury; in kindergarten, including transitional kindergarten, grades 1-12 through age 22, and classes        
R3EN6Rorganized primarily for adults in services across the continuum of program options available.                                
R3EP1RThis document authorizes teaching all subjects in a self-contained transitional kindergarten general education classroom.    
R3ER1RThis authorizes the holder to conduct Educational Assessments related to students' access to the academic curriculum and     
R3ER2Rprogress towards meeting instructional academic goals; and provide instruction and Special Education Support to students     
R3ER3R birth through kindergarten who are eligible for early intervention special education and related services related to one or 
R3ER4Rmore of the following disabilities: autism, emotional disturbance, intellectual disability, orthopedic impairment, other     
R3ER5Rhealth impairment, specific learning disability, traumatic brain injury, and multiple disabilities including developmental   
R3ER6Rdelay and a disabling medical condition in services across the continuum of program options available.                       
R3F 1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach single-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses in the field of mathematics  
R3F 2Rin grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.                              
R3F11RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach mathematics in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes   
R3F12Rorganized primarily for adults.  It also authorizes the holder to develop and coordinate curriculum, develop programs, and   
R3F13Rdeliver staff development for mathematics education programs coordinated by school districts and county offices of           
R3F21RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach mathematics in grades twelve and below, including preschool and classes       
R3F22Rorganized primarily for adults.  It also authorizes the holder to develop and coordinate mathematics curriculum; coach       
R3F23Rmathematics teachers; design and implement intensive mathematics intervention; teach teachers to effectively intervene,      
R3F24Raccommodate, and differentiate their mathematics instruction to increase student engagement and proficiency in mathematics;  
R3F25Rprovide leadership in selecting the mathematics curricula and in developing a district-, county- or state-wide cadre of      
R3F26Rmathematics leaders; analyze and use data to restructure school and district mathematics programs to increase students'      
R3F27Rcollege-readiness; and develop programs and deliver staff development for mathematics education programs coordinated by      
R3F28Rschool districts and county offices of education.                                                                            
R3G 1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach reading, and to develop and deliver programs for the remediation of reading   
R3G 2Rdifficulties, to students in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.    
R3G11RThis credential authorizes the holder to assist and support the classroom teacher in reading instruction and teaching        
R3G12Rstrategies, select and adapt reading instruction materials, plan and conduct reading staff development, assess student       
R3G13Rprogress and monitor student achievement in reading, provide direct reading intervention work with students, and develop and 
R3G14Rcoordinate reading programs at the school site, school district, or county level in grades twelve and below, including       
R3G15Rpreschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.                                                                    
R3GR1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach reading, and to develop and deliver programs for the remediation of reading   
R3GR2Rdifficulties, to students in grades kindergarten through six.                                                                
R3HD1RThis authorizes the holder to conduct Educational Assessments related to students' access to the academic core curriculum    
R3HD2Rprogress towards meeting instructional academic goals, provide instruction, and Special Education Support to individuals     
R3HD3Rwith a disability of deaf or hard-of-hearing or deafblind, including autism, and services to students with a hearing loss    
R3HD4Rthat manifests itself in conjunction with additional disabilities including unilateral or bilateral, whether fluctuating,    
R3HD5Rconductive, sensorineural, and/or auditory neuropathy, to students from birth through age 22, and classes organized          
R3HD6R primarily for adults in services across the continuum of program options available.                                         
R3LD1RThe Education Specialist Instruction Credential: Language and Academic Development authorizes the holder to conduct          
R3LD2REducational Assessments related to students' access to the academic core curriculum and progress towards meeting             
R3LD3Rinstructional academic goals, provide instruction, and Special Education Support to individuals as defined in subsections    
R3LD4R300.8(c)(1) through (10), (12), and (13) and to students with expressive or receptive language disorders within subsection   
R3LD5R300.8(c)(11) of Title 34 Code of Federal Regulations, Subpart A, with academic communication and language needs in the       
R3LD6Rfollowing areas: language development, school readiness and social skills, and literacy development addressing competencies  
R3LD7Racross the curriculum in listening, speaking, reading, writing, and academic areas, in preschool, kindergarten, in grades 1  
R3LD8R- 12 through age 22, and classes organized primarily for adults in services across the continuum of program options          
R3LD9Ravailable.                                                                                                                   
R3LH1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach handicapped children in a special class in which the primary disability is      
R3LH2R"specific learning disability," "other health impairment," or "mentally retarded (mild)" as defined in subsection 300.5 of   
R3LH3RTitle 34 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Subpart A, in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes      
R3LH4Rorganized primarily for adults.                                                                                              
R3MM1RThis authorizes the holder to conduct Educational Assessments related to student's access to the academic core curriculum    
R3MM2Rprogress towards meeting instructional academic goals, provide instruction, and Special Education Support to individuals     
R3MM3Rwith a primary disability of specific learning disabilities, mild/moderate intellectual disabilities, other health           
R3MM4Rimpairment, and emotional disturbance, in kindergarten, grades 1 - 12 through age 22, and classes organized primarily for    
R3MM5R adults in services across the continuum of program options available.                                                       
R3MN1RThis authorizes the holder to conduct educational Assessments related to students' access to the academic curriculum and     
R3MN2Rprogress towards meeting instructional goals, provide instruction, and Special Education Support to students with mild to    
R3MN3Rmoderate support needs related to one or more of the following disabilities: autism, emotional disturbance, intellectual     
R3MN4Rdisability, multiple disabilities, orthopedic impairment, other health impairment, specific learning disability, and         
R3MN5Rtraumatic brain injury; in kindergarten, including transitional kindergarten, grades 1-12 through age 22, and classes        
R3MN6Rorganized primarily for adults in services across the continuum of program options available.                                
R3MS1RThis authorizes the holder to conduct Educational Assessments related to student's access to the academic core curriculum    
R3MS2Rprogress towards meeting instructional academic goals, provide instruction, and Special Education Support to individuals     
R3MS3Rwith a primary disability of autism, moderate/severe intellectual disabilities, deaf-blind, emotional disturbance, and       
R3MS4Rmultiple disabilities, to students in kindergarten, grades 1 - 12 through age 22, and classes organized primarily for        
R3MS5Rs in services across the continuum of program options available.                                                             
R3PD1RThis credential authorizes the holder to instruct deaf and hearing-impaired pupils enrolled in state special schools, or in  
R3PD2Rspecial classes for pupils with hearing impairments, in preschool, kindergarten through grade twelve, and in classes         
R3PD3Rorganized primarily for adults.                                                                                              
R3PH1RThis authorizes the holder to conduct Educational Assessments related to students' access to the academic core curriculum    
R3PH2Rprogress towards meeting instructional academic goals, provide instruction, and Special Education Support to individuals     
R3PH3Rwith a primary disability of orthopedic impairment, other health impairment, multiple disabilities, and traumatic brain      
R3PH4R injury, to students from birth through age 22, and classes organized primarily for adults in services, across the continuum 
R3PH5Rof program options available.                                                                                                
R3PI1RThis document authorizes the holder to provide instruction and related services to individuals with a primary disability of  
R3PI2Rorthopedic impairment, other health impairment, multiple disabilities, and traumatic brain injury, from birth through grade  
R3PI3R12, and in classes organized primarily for adults, across the continuum of program options available pursuant to Education   
R3PI4RCode Sections 56031, 56360, and 56361.  The continuum includes: regular classrooms; resource rooms; special day classrooms;  
R3PI5Rspecial schools; home/hospital settings; correctional facilities; non-public, non-sectarian schools and agencies; and        
R3PI6Ralternative instructional settings other than classrooms.                                                                    
R3PV1RThis credential, initially issued prior to 1981, authorizes the holder to teach handicapped children in a special class in   
R3PV2Rwhich the primary disability is "multi-handicapped" or "orthopedically impaired" or "other health impaired (having limited   
R3PV3Rstrength, vitality or alertness)" or "visually handicapped" or "deaf-blind" as defined in subsection 300.5 of Title 34 of    
R3PV4R Code of Federal Regulations, Subpart A, in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily 
R3PV5Rfor adults.                                                                                                                  
R3SE1RThis permit authorizes the holder to conduct Educational Assessments related to students' access to the academic core        
R3SE2Rcurriculum and progress towards meeting instructional academic goals, provide instruction, and Special Education Support to  
R3SE3Rindividuals identified as needing special education services across the continuum of program options available and in any    
R3SE4Rspecialty area in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.               
R3SH1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach handicapped children in a special class in which the primary disability is      
R3SH2R"seriously emotionally disturbed" or "mentally retarded (severely)" or "multi-handicapped" or "other health impaired         
R3SH3R(autistic)" as defined in subsection 300.5 of Title 34 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Subpart A, in grades twelve and   
R3SH4Rbelow, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.                                                   
R3SR1RThis credential authorizes the holder to provide instruction, guidance, and care to children in a special center as          
R3SR2R in Education Code Section 56364.                                                                                            
R3VB1RThis authorizes the holder to conduct Educational Assessments related to student's access to the academic core curriculum    
R3VB2Rprogress towards meeting instructional academic goals, provide instruction, and Special Education Support to individuals     
R3VB3Rwith a disability of visual impairment including blind or deafblind, including autism, to students from birth through age    
R3VB4R 22, and classes organized primarily for adults in services across the continuum of program options available.               
R3VH1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach handicapped children in a special class in which the primary disability is      
R3VH2R"visually handicapped" or "deaf-blind" as defined in subsection 300.5 of Title 34 of the Code of Federal Regulations,        
R3VH3R A, in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.                          
R3VI1RThis authorizes the holder to conduct Educational Assessments related to students' access to the academic core curriculum    
R3VI2Rprogress towards meeting instructional academic goals, provide instruction, and Special Education Support to individuals     
R3VI3Rwith a primary disability of visual impairment including blind and deaf-blind, to students from birth through age 22, and    
R3VI4R classes organized primarily for adults in services across the continuum of program options available.                       
R4  1RContact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
R4A 1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the subject or subjects listed in technical, trade, or vocational courses     
R4A 2Rare part of a vocational education program in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized         
R4A 3R primarily for adults.                                                                                                       
R4AP1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the subject or subjects listed in technical, trade, or vocational courses     
R4AP2Rare part of a vocational education program in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized         
R4AP3Rprimarily for adults, for not more than one-half of a full-time teaching assignment as established by the employing school   
R4AP4R district.                                                                                                                   
R4B 1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the subject or subjects listed in classes organized primarily for adults.     
R4BP1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the subject or subjects listed in classes organized primarily for adults for  
R4BP2Rnot more than one-half of a full-time teaching assignment as established by the employing school district.                   
R4C 1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the special subject or subjects listed in grades twelve and below, including  
R4C 2Rpreschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.                                                                    
R4FA1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach the subject or subjects listed in courses organized primarily for adults.     
R4FV1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach in the subject or subjects listed in grades twelve and below and in classes   
R4FV2Rorganized primarily for adults, in technical, trade, or vocational courses that shall be part of a program of technical,     
R4FV3Rtrade, or vocational education.                                                                                              
R4H 1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach not more than half-time in the subject or subjects listed in grades twelve    
R4H 2Rbelow, and in classes organized primarily for adults in career technical instruction courses.  Half-time for the holder of   
R4H 3Rthis credential who teaches in only one school district shall not exceed one-half of a full-time assignment for career       
R4H 4Rtechnical educators in that school district.  Half-time for the holder who teaches in more than one school district shall    
R4H 5Rnot exceed one-half of the greatest number of hours considered to be a full-time assignment for career technical educators   
R4H 6R in any one of the districts.                                                                                                
R4PA1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach not more than half-time in the subject or subjects listed in courses          
R4PA2R primarily for adults.  Half-time for the holder of this credential who teaches in only one school district shall not exceed 
R4PA3Rone-half of a full-time assignment for adult educators in that school district.  Half-time for the holder who teaches in     
R4PA4Rthan one school district shall not exceed one-half of the greatest number of hours considered to be a full-time assignment   
R4PA5R for adult educators in any one of the districts.                                                                            
R4PV1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach not more than half-time in the subject or subjects listed in grades twelve    
R4PV2Rbelow, and in classes organized primarily for adults, in technical, trade, or vocational courses which shall be part of a    
R4PV3Rprogram of technical, trade, or vocational education.  Half-time for the holder of this credential who teaches in only one   
R4PV4Rschool district shall not exceed one-half of a full-time assignment for vocational educators in that school district.        
R4PV5RHalf-time for the holder who teaches in more than one school district shall not exceed one-half of the greatest number of    
R4PV6Rf hours considered to be a full-time assignment for vocational educators in any one of the districts.                        
R4T 1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach in the subject or subjects listed in grades twelve and below and in classes   
R4T 2Rorganized primarily for adults, in career technical instruction courses.                                                     
R5  1RContact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
R51 1RContact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
R5111RThis credential authorizes the holder to perform the following services in grades 12 and below, including preschool, and in  
R5112Rprograms organized primarily for adults: develop, plan implement and evaluate a school counseling and guidance program that  
R5113Rincludes academic, career, personal and social development; advocate for the high academic achievement and social            
R5114Rof all students; provide school-wide prevention and intervention strategies and counseling services; provide consultation,   
R5115Rtraining and staff development to teachers and parents regarding students' needs; and supervise a district- approved         
R5116R advisory program as described in Education Code Section 49600.                                                              
R5121RThis credential authorizes the holder to perform the following services in grades 12 and below, including preschool, and in  
R5122Rprograms organized primarily for adults: assess home, school, personal and community factors that may affect a student's     
R5123Rlearning; identify and provide intervention strategies for children and their families, including counseling, case           
R5124Rmanagement, and crisis intervention; consult with teachers, administrators and other school staff regarding social and       
R5125Remotional needs of students; and coordinate family, school and community resources on behalf of students.                    
R5131RThis credential authorizes the holder to perform the following services in grades 12 and below, including preschool, and in  
R5132Rprograms organized primarily for adults: provide services that enhance academic performance; design strategies and programs  
R5133Rto address problems of adjustment; consult with other educators and parents on issues of social development, behavioral and  
R5134Racademic difficulties; conduct psycho-educational assessments for purposes of identifying special needs; provide             
R5135Rpsychological counseling for individuals, groups and families; and coordinate intervention strategies for management of      
R5136Rindividual and school-wide crises.                                                                                           
R5141RThis credential authorizes the holder to perform the following services in grades 12 and below, including preschool, and in  
R5142Rprograms organized primarily for adults: access appropriate services from both public and private providers, including law   
R5143Renforcement and social services; provide staff development to school personnel regarding state and federal laws pertaining   
R5144Rdue process and child welfare and attendance laws; address school policies and procedures that inhibit academic success;     
R5145Rimplement strategies to improve student attendance; participate in school-wide reform efforts; and promote understanding     
R5146Rd appreciation of those factors that affect the attendance of culturally-diverse student populations.                        
R5151RThis credential authorizes the holder to serve deaf and hearing impaired pupils enrolled in state special schools or in      
R5152Rspecial classes for pupils with hearing impairments in grades 12 and below, including preschool, and in programs organized   
R5153Rprimarily for adults as follows: to develop, plan, implement and evaluate a school counseling and guidance program that      
R5154Rincludes academic, career, personal and social development; advocate for the high academic achievement and social            
R5155Rof all students; provide school-wide prevention and intervention strategies and counseling services; provide consultation,   
R5156Rtraining and staff development to teachers and parents regarding students' needs; and supervise a district- approved         
R5157R advisory program as described in Education Code Section 49600.                                                              
R51A1RThis credential authorizes the holder to perform basic pupil personnel services, including, but not limited to, school       
R51A2Rcounseling, child welfare and attendance, and school social work, in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in    
R51A3Rclasses organized primarily for adults.                                                                                      
R51B1RThis credential authorizes the holder to serve as a school psychologist in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and 
R51B2Rin classes organized primarily for adults.                                                                                   
R51C1RThis credential authorizes the holder to perform basic pupil personnel services, including, but not limited to, school       
R51C2Rcounseling, child welfare and attendance, and school social work, and to serve as a school psychologist, in grades twelve    
R51C3R below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.                                                  
R51D1RThis credential authorizes the holder to perform pupil personnel services in the specialization or specializations listed in 
R51D2Rgrades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.                                 
R52A1RThis credential authorizes the holder to serve as a health professional as listed in grades twelve and below, including      
R52A2Rpreschool.                                                                                                                   
R52B1RThis credential authorizes the holder to serve as a health professional as listed in grades twelve and below, including      
R52B2Rpreschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.                                                                    
R52D1RContact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
R52H1RThe special teaching authorization in health authorizes the holder to teach classes in health in grades 12 and below,        
R52H2Rincluding preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.                                                          
R52N1RThis credential authorizes the holder to conduct immunization programs, assess and evaluate the health and development       
R52N2Rof pupils; interpret the health and development assessment to parents, teachers, administrators and other professionals      
R52N3Rdirectly concerned with the pupil; design and implement individual student health maintenance plans, incorporating plans     
R52N4Rdirected by a physician; maintain communication with parents and all involved community practitioners and agencies to        
R52N5Rpromote needed treatment and secure reports of findings pertinent to educational planning; interpret medical and nursing     
R52N6Rfindings appropriate to the student's individualized education program and make recommendations to professional personnel    
R52N7Rdirectly involved; consult with, conduct in-service training for, and serve as a resource person to teachers and             
R52N8Radministrators; develop and implement health education curriculum; act as a participant in implementing a comprehensive      
R52N9Rhealth instruction curriculum for students; counsel and assist pupils and parents in health related and school adjustment    
R52NAR services; and to teach health related subjects under the supervision of a classroom teacher.                                
R53 1RThis document authorizes the holder to perform the following services in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and   
R53 2R classes organized primarily for adults:  assist and instruct pupils in the choice and use of library materials; plan school 
R53 3Rlibrary programs and coordinate them with the instructional programs of the school district; select materials for school and 
R53 4Rdistrict libraries; conduct a planned course of instruction for those pupils who assist in the operation of school           
R53 5Rsupervise classified personnel assigned school library duties; and develop procedures for the management of the school and   
R53 6R district libraries.                                                                                                         
R53A1RThis credential authorizes the holder to instruct pupils in the choice and use of library materials; to plan and coordinate  
R53A2Rschool library programs with the instructional programs of a school district; to select materials for school and district    
R53A3Rlibraries; to coordinate or supervise library programs at the school, district or county level; to plan and conduct a course 
R53A4Rof instruction for those pupils who assist in the operation of school libraries; to supervise classified personnel assigned  
R53A5Rschool library duties; and to develop procedures for and management of the school and district libraries.                    
R53B1RThis credential authorizes the holder to instruct students in accessing, evaluating, using and integrating information and   
R53B2Rresources in the library program; to plan and coordinate school library programs with the instructional programs of a school 
R53B3Rdistrict through collaboration with teachers; to select materials for school and district libraries; to develop programs for 
R53B4Rand deliver staff development for school library services; to coordinate or supervise library programs at the school,        
R53B5Rdistrict or county level; to plan and conduct a course of instruction for those pupils who assist in the operation of school 
R53B6Rlibraries; to supervise classified personnel assigned school library duties; and to develop procedures for and management of 
R53B7Rthe school and district libraries.                                                                                           
R53S1RThis Special Class Authorization authorizes the holder to provide departmentalized instruction in information literacy,      
R53S2Rdigital literacy, and digital citizenship to students in grades 12 and below, including preschool and in classes organized   
R53S3Rprimarily for adults pursuant to the California Code of Regulations Title 5 section 80053.1 (c) and (d).                     
R54 1RThis credential authorizes the holder to serve as a superintendent, associate superintendent, deputy superintendent,         
R54 2Rprincipal, assistant principal, supervisor, consultant, coordinator, or in an equivalent or intermediate level               
R54 3R position, in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.                   
R54A1RThis credential authorizes the holder to provide the following services in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and 
R54A2Rin classes organized primarily for adults: develop, coordinate, and assess instructional programs; evaluate certificated and 
R54A3Rclassified personnel; provide students discipline, including but not limited to suspension and expulsion; provide            
R54A4Rcertificated and classified employees discipline, including but not limited to suspension, dismissal, and reinstatement;     
R54A5Rsupervise certificated and classified personnel; manage school site, district, or county level fiscal services; recruit,     
R54A6Remploy, and assign certificated and classified personnel; and develop, coordinate, and supervise student support services    
R54A7Rincluding but not limited to extracurricular activities, pupil personnel services, health services, library services, and    
R54A8Rtechnology support services.                                                                                                 
R54C1RThe holder of this Certificate of Eligibility has completed the requirements for the preliminary Administrative Services     
R54C2RCredential and is authorized to seek employment in an administrative position.  The preliminary credential will be issued if 
R54C3Rthe holder maintains his or her valid prerequisite credential and submits (1) verification of employment in an               
R54C4R position on a form provided by the Commission, and (2) an application form and appropriate fee to the Commission on Teacher 
R54C5RCredentialing.  The fee for the preliminary credential has been established at one-half of the application fee in effect at  
R54C6Rthe time the application is submitted.                                                                                       
R54O1RThis credential authorizes the holder to provide the following services in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and 
R54O2Rin classes organized primarily for adults: develop, coordinate, and assess instructional programs; evaluate certificated and 
R54O3Rclassified personnel (excluding teachers); provide students discipline, including but not limited to suspension and          
R54O4Rexpulsion; provide certificated and classified employees discipline (excluding teachers), including but not limited to       
R54O5Rsuspension, dismissal, and reinstatement; supervise certificated and classified personnel (excluding teachers); manage       
R54O6Rsite, district, or county level fiscal services; recruit, employ, and assign certificated and classified personnel; and      
R54O7Rdevelop, coordinate, and supervise student support services including but not limited to extracurricular activities, pupil   
R54O8Rpersonnel services, health services, library services, and technology support services. This authorization shall not         
R54O9R authorize the supervision or evaluation of teachers.                                                                        
R54P1RThe holder of this Certificate of Eligibility has completed the requirements for the preliminary Administrative Services     
R54P2RCredential based on holding a valid license in Occupational Therapy or Physical Therapy. The holder is authorized to seek    
R54P3Remployment in an administrative position.  The preliminary credential will be issued if the holder submits (1) verification  
R54P4Rof employment in an administrative position on a form provided by the Commission, and (2) an application form and            
R54P5R fee to the Commission on Teacher Credentialing.  The fee for the preliminary credential has been established at one-half of 
R54P6Rthe application fee in effect at the time the application is submitted.                                                      
R56 1RContact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
R56A1RThis document authorizes the holder to provide clinical or rehabilitative services within the authorized field or fields     
R56A2Rlisted to students in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.           
R56B1RThis document authorizes the holder to provide clinical or rehabilitative services within the authorized field or fields     
R56B2Rlisted and to teach handicapped children in a special class in which the primary disability is "speech and language          
R56B3Ras defined in subsection 300.5 of Title 34 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Subpart A, in grades twelve and below,        
R56B4R including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.                                                         
R56C1RThis document authorizes the holder to provide clinical or rehabilitative services within the authorized field or fields     
R56C2Rlisted and to provide instruction and related services to individuals with a primary disability of speech and language       
R56C3Rimpairment or autism, from birth through grade 12, and in classes organized primarily for adults, across the continuum of    
R56C4Rprogram options available pursuant to Education Code Sections 56031, 56360, and 56361.  The continuum includes: regular      
R56C5Rclassrooms; resource rooms; special day classrooms; special schools; home/hospital settings; correctional facilities;        
R56C6Rnon-public, nonsectarian schools and agencies; and alternative instructional settings other than classrooms.                 
R56E1RThis credential certifies that the governing board of the school district listed has recommended the holder to serve in the  
R56E2Rfield listed and that the Commission on Teacher Credentialing, per Education Code Section 44262, has reviewed the            
R56E3Rrecommendation and authorized the holder to serve in that field in the grades indicated.                                     
R56F1RThis credential certifies that the Commission on Teacher Credentialing, per Education Code Section 44262, has reviewed the   
R56F2Rrecommendation of the governing board of the California school district that employed the holder during the first five years 
R56F3Rthat he or she held this credential and has authorized the holder to continue to serve in the field listed in the grades     
R56F4Rindicated.                                                                                                                   
R5E 1RThis credential certifies that the governing board of the school district listed has recommended the holder to teach in the  
R5E 2Rfield or subject listed and that the Commission on Teacher Credentialing, per Education Code Section 44262, has reviewed the 
R5E 3Rrecommendation and authorized the holder to teach that field or subject in the grades indicated.                             
R5F 1RThis credential certifies that the Commission on Teacher Credentialing, per Education Code Section 44262, has reviewed the   
R5F 2Rrecommendation of the governing board of the California school district that employed the holder during the first five years 
R5F 3Rthat he or she held this credential and has authorized the holder to continue to teach in the field or subject listed in the 
R5F 4Rgrades indicated.                                                                                                            
R5PD1RThis credential authorizes the holder to serve at all grade levels, preschool, kindergarten through grade twelve, and in     
R5PD2Rclasses organized primarily for adults, as a school counselor of deaf and hearing-impaired pupils who are enrolled in state  
R5PD3Rspecial schools or in special classes for pupils with hearing impairments.                                                   
R7  1RContact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
R8  1RThis credential authorizes the holder to provide bilingual instruction in the authorized field or fields listed, foreign     
R8  2Rlanguage instruction in the target language listed, and instruction for cultural enrichment, in the grades indicated.        
R9  1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach single-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses within the authorized field  
R9  2Ror fields listed in grades six through twelve.                                                                               
R94 1RThis document authorizes the holder to provide the following services to English learners in grades six through twelve: (1)  
R94 2Rinstruction for English language development; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English within the     
R94 3Rauthorized field or fields named; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of emphasis listed in                    
R94 4Rsingle-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses in the subjects authorized by this document; and (4) instruction for        
R94 5R language development in the language of emphasis listed.                                                                    
R9B 1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach in the specific science area listed on the document in grades six through       
R9B 2Rtwelve.                                                                                                                      
R9BE1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach English as a Second Language in grades six through twelve; and to teach       
R9BE2Rsingle-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses within the authorized field or fields listed to limited-English proficient  
R9BE3Rand non-English proficient students in the language of bilingual crosscultural emphasis listed or in English language        
R9BE4Rdevelopment programs in grades six through twelve.                                                                           
R9BL1RThis document authorizes the holder to provide the following services to limited-English-proficient pupils in grades six     
R9BL2Rthrough twelve: (1) instruction for English language development; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in    
R9BL3REnglish in single-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses in the subjects authorized by this document; (3) content         
R9BL4Rinstruction delivered in the language of emphasis listed above in single-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses in the    
R9BL5Rsubjects authorized by this document; and (4) instruction for primary language development in the language of emphasis       
R9BL6R above.                                                                                                                      
R9C 1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach in the specific science area listed on the document in grades six through       
R9C 2Rtwelve.                                                                                                                      
R9E 1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach single-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses, provide English learners      
R9E 2Rinstruction for English language development, and specially designed content instruction delivered in English within the     
R9E 3Rauthorized field or fields listed in grades six through twelve.                                                              
R9F 1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach introductory and general science, introductory life science, and introductory   
R9F 2Rphysical science in grades six through twelve; and integrated science in grades six through eight.                           
R9G 1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach in the specific science area listed on the document in grades six through       
R9G 2Rtwelve.                                                                                                                      
R9H 1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach in the specific science area listed on the document in grades six through       
R9H 2Rtwelve.                                                                                                                      
R9M 1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach the content areas in general mathematics, algebra, geometry, probability and    
R9M 2Rstatistics, and consumer mathematics in grades six through twelve.                                                           
R9P 1RIn addition, this document authorizes the holder to provide content instruction delivered in the language of emphasis listed 
R9P 2Rin single-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses in the subjects authorized by this document and instruction for primary  
R9P 3Rlanguage development in the language of emphasis listed to English learners in grades six through twelve.                    
R9W 1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach the following in grades six through twelve within any content area(s) listed on 
R9W 2Rthis document: (1) departmentalized instruction in English language development designed specifically for                    
R9W 3Rlimited-English-proficient students to develop their listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills in English; and (2)    
R9W 4Rspecially designed content instruction delivered in English defined as instruction in a subject area, delivered in English,  
R9W 5Rthat is specially designed to meet the needs of limited-English-proficient students.                                         
RLAA1RThis added authorization, when held in conjunction with a prerequisite credential, authorizes the holder to provide the      
RLAA2Rfollowing services to students at the school site level, at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential: (1)  
RLAA3Rprovide direct reading intervention to students and adapt instructional practices and strategies to provide direct           
RLAA4Rspecialized reading instruction to students with severe reading difficulties including monitoring and adjusting intervention 
RLAA5Rinstruction; (2) participate in the adoption of literacy curricula, facilitate and monitor implementation of adopted         
RLAA6Rcurricula, and support and assist teachers in the use of literacy curricula; (3) select and administer ongoing formal and    
RLAA7Rinformal diagnostic assessments of students' progress, report results, assist teachers in modifying instructional practices, 
RLAA8Rand use the results for student placement in and exit from reading intervention programs; (4) interpret results of           
RLAA9Rschool-wide reading assessment data to monitor student progress and identify modification of instructional practices and     
RLAAARstrategies to assist teachers; (5) develop, implement and adapt reading and literacy instructional materials, technologies,  
RLAABRand strategies in alignment with students' assessed reading and literacy needs including the prevention and intervention of  
RLAACRreading difficulties; and assist teachers to ensure that the full range of students develop proficiency; and (6)	assist      
RLLS1RThis document authorizes the holder to provide the following services at the school site, school district, or county level   
RLLS2Rgrades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults: (1) provide direct reading      
RLLS3Rintervention to students and adapt instructional routines and strategies to provide direct specialized reading instruction   
RLLS4Rto students with severe reading difficulties, including monitoring and adjusting intervention instruction; (2) coordinate    
RLLS5Radoption and facilitate implementation of adopted literacy curricula, including providing training to teachers; (3) select   
RLLS6Rand administer reading and literacy assessments, interpret results to determine student growth and identification of         
RLLS7Rstruggling students, select interventions, communicate results, and provide guidance and coaching to teachers; (4) design,   
RLLS8Rimplement, and evaluate a comprehensive literacy plan; (5) support students' literacy development and inform and train       
RLLS9Rteachers in literacy skills using information and communication technologies; and (6) evaluate literacy practices and        
RLLSAR report findings, guide teachers and administrators in collaborative efforts to design, implement, and evaluate local, state 
RLLSBRand/or federal programs, and plan and conduct staff development.                                                             
RPPD1RThis credential authorizes the holder to serve deaf and hearing impaired pupils enrolled in state special schools or in      
RPPD2Rspecial classes for pupils with hearing impairments.                                                                         
RSAA1RThe Resource Specialist Added Authorization authorizes the holder to provide instruction and services to pupils whose needs  
RSAA2Rhave been identified in a written Individualized Education Program (IEP), Individualized Family Service Program (IFSP),      
RSAA3Rand/or Individualized Transition Plan (ITP) developed by a school appraisal team or an educational assessment service and    
RSAA4Rare assigned to general education classroom teachers for a majority of a school day; to provide information and assistance   
RSAA5Rto individuals with exceptional needs and their parents; to provide consultation, resource information, and material         
RSAA6R regarding individuals with exceptional needs to their parents and to general education staff members; to coordinate special 
RSAA7Reducation services provided each individual with exceptional needs served through the resource specialist program; and to    
RSAA8Rassess student progress on a regular basis, participate in the review and revision of IEPs, IFSP, or ITP as appropriate, and 
RSAA9Rrefer students who do not demonstrate appropriate progress to the educational assessment service.                            
RSUB1RThis credential authorizes the holder to serve as a substitute teacher for not more than thirty days for any one teacher     
RSUB2Rduring a school year in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.         
RUBA1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners limited to the grades authorized by the intern      
RUBA2Rcredential: (1) instruction for English language development; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in        
RUBA3Rin the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
RUBA4RRussian in the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; and (4) instruction for primary language           
RUBA5R development in the language of Russian.                                                                                     
S1  1RThis document authorizes the holder to provide instruction and services to pupils whose needs have been identified in a      
S1  2Rwritten Individualized Education Program (IEP), Individualized Family Service Program (IFSP), and/or Individualized          
S1  3RTransition Plan (ITP) developed by a school appraisal team or an educational assessment service and who are assigned to      
S1  4Rgeneral education classroom teachers for a majority of a school day; to provide information and assistance to individuals    
S1  5Rwith exceptional needs and their parents; to provide consultation, resource information, and material regarding individuals  
S1  6Rwith exceptional needs to their parents and to general education staff members; to coordinate special education services     
S1  7Rprovided each individual with exceptional needs served through the resource specialist program; and to assess student        
S1  8Rprogress on a regular basis, participate in the review and revision of IEPs, IFSP, or ITP as appropriate, and refer students 
S1  9Rwho do not demonstrate appropriate progress to the educational assessment service.                                           
S10 1RThis document certifies that the holder is competent to assess limited-English proficient students, whose native language is 
S10 2Rthe target language listed, for the purpose of placement into special education programs, in grades twelve and below,        
S10 3Rincluding preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.                                                          
S11 1RContact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
S12 1RThis certificate, when held in conjunction with a prerequisite credential or permit specified in Education Code Section      
S12 2R44253.3, authorizes the holder to provide the following services to limited-English-proficient pupils:  (1) instruction for  
S12 3REnglish language development in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults, 
S12 4Rexcept when the prerequisite credential or permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a children's 
S12 5Rcenter instructional permit, or a children's center supervision permit, in which case instruction for English language       
S12 6Rdevelopment is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit; and (2) specially designed content           
S12 7Rinstruction delivered in English in the subjects and at the levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit.      
S12 8REducation Code Section 44253.3 includes all credentials and permits that authorize instruction except emergency credentials  
S12 9Ror permits, college or university internship credentials, District Internship Certificates, Exchange Certificated Employee   
S12 ARTeaching Credentials, or Sojourn Certificated Employee Teaching Credentials.                                                 
S14 1RThis certificate, when held in conjunction with a prerequisite credential or permit specified in Education Code Section      
S14 2R44253.4, authorizes the holder to provide the following services to limited-English-proficient pupils:  (1) instruction for  
S14 3REnglish language development, and instruction for primary language development in the language of emphasis listed, in grades 
S14 4Rtwelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults, except when the prerequisite           
S14 5Ror permit is a designated subjects adult education teaching credential, a children's center instructional permit, or a       
S14 6Rchildren's center supervision permit, in which case instruction for English language development and primary language        
S14 7Rdevelopment is limited to the programs authorized by that credential or permit; (2) specially designed content instruction   
S14 8R delivered in English in the subjects and at the levels authorized by the prerequisite credential or permit; and (3) content 
S14 9Rinstruction delivered in the language of emphasis listed in the subjects and at the levels authorized by the prerequisite    
S14 ARcredential or permit.  Education Code Section 44253.4 includes all credentials and permits that authorize instruction except 
S14 BRemergency credentials or permits, college or university internship credentials, District Internship Certificates, Exchange   
S14 CRCertificated Employee Teaching Credentials, or Sojourn Certificated Employee Teaching Credentials.                           
S16 1RThis certificate, when held in conjunction with a prerequisite credential, authorizes the holder to provide the following    
S16 2Rservices to students at one or more school sites, at the grade levels authorized by the prerequisite credential: (1) provide 
S16 3Rstudent assessment in reading, and student instruction that is responsive to the assessments; (2) develop, implement and     
S16 4Radapt reading instruction, and assist teachers with respect to the prevention and intervention of reading difficulties; and  
S16 5R(3) develop, implement and adapt instruction, and assist teachers, to enable all students to read and comprehend the content 
S16 6Rof the curriculum.                                                                                                           
S17 1RContact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
S17A1RThis certificate, when held in conjunction with a teaching or services credential specified in Education Code Section        
S17A2R44253.11(a), authorizes the holder to provide services to English learners in specially designed content instruction         
S17A3Rdelivered in English in the subject and the grade authorized by the teacher's credential.                                    
S17C1RThis document authorizes the holder to provide services to English learners in specially designed content instruction        
S17C2Rdelivered in English in grades twelve and below and in classes organized primarily for adults, in career technical           
S17C3Rinstruction courses.                                                                                                         
S17D1RThis certificate, when held in conjunction with a basic teaching credential specified in Education Code Section 44203(e),    
S17D2Rauthorizes the holder to provide the following services to limited-English-proficient pupils: (1) specially designed content 
S17D3Rinstruction delivered in English in the subject and the grade authorized by the teacher's basic credential, and (2)          
S17D4Rinstruction for English language development to students in a departmentalized class in the subject and the grade authorized 
S17D5Rby the teacher's basic credential.                                                                                           
S17S1RThis certificate, when held in conjunction with a prerequisite credential specified in Education Code Section 44203(e),      
S17S2Rauthorizes the holder to provide instruction for English language development to students in a self-contained classroom.     
S21 1RContact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
S22 1RThis certificate authorizes the holder to teach English as a Second Language in grades twelve and below, including           
S22 2Rand in classes organized primarily for adults; and to teach limited-English proficient and non-English proficient students   
S22 3R in English language development programs, at the level and in the subject of the prerequisite teaching credential.          
S3  1RThis credential authorizes the holder to supervise and coordinate vocational education subjects including, but not limited   
S3  2Rto, vocational trade and technical, vocational business, vocational agriculture, and occupational homemaking education, in   
S3  3Rgrades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.                                 
S4  1RThis credential authorizes the holder to supervise and coordinate subjects and classes in all types of designated subjects   
S4  2Rprograms, in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.                    
S5  1RThis credential authorizes the holder to supervise and coordinate non-vocational designated subjects including, but not      
S5  2Rlimited to, adult education, driver education and training, basic military drill, reserve officer training corps, and        
S5  3Raviation subjects, in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.           
S6  1RThis certificate authorizes the holder to teach English as a Second Language in grades twelve and below, including           
S6  2Rand in classes organized primarily for adults; and to teach limited-English proficient and non-English proficient students   
S6  3Rin the target language named or in English language development programs, at the level and in the subject of the             
S6  4R prerequisite teaching credential.                                                                                           
S7  1RThis credential authorizes the holder to provide instruction and services to individuals with exceptional needs who are      
S7  2Rprecluded from participation in the activities of either the general physical education program or a specially designed      
S7  3Rphysical education program in a special class, in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized     
S7  4Rprimarily for adults.                                                                                                        
S8  1RContact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
S9  1RContact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
SDAI1LSpecially Designed Academic Instruction Delivered in English                                                                 
SEEC1RThis authorizes the holder to conduct Educational Assessments related to students' access to the academic curriculum and     
SEEC2Rprogress towards meeting instructional academic goals; and provide instruction and Special Education Support to students     
SEEC3R birth through kindergarten who are eligible for early intervention special education and related services related to one or 
SEEC4Rmore of the following disabilities: autism, emotional disturbance, intellectual disability, orthopedic impairment, other     
SEEC5Rhealth impairment, specific learning disability, traumatic brain injury, and multiple disabilities including developmental   
SEEC6Rdelay and a disabling medical condition in services across the continuum of program options available.                       
SLM21RPursuant to California Family Code Section 17520, this temporary document or waiver approval letter is valid for no more     
SLM22Rone hundred and fifty days.  The law does not permit any extension of this temporary document or waiver approval letter.     
SLM23RRequirements for issuance of this document or waiver approval letter for its full term have been explained in a letter to    
SLM24Ro the applicant.                                                                                                             
SLMS1RPursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Section 11350.6, this temporary document or waiver approval letter is valid for no 
SLMS2Rmore than one hundred and fifty days.  The law does not permit any extension of this temporary document or waiver approval   
SLMS3Rletter.  Requirements for issuance of this document or waiver approval letter for its full term have been explained in a     
SLMS4Rletter to the applicant.                                                                                                     
SMAA1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach courses in the specific subject or subjects listed in departmentalized        
SMAA2R in grades preschool and K-12 or in classes organized primarily for adults.                                                  
SMAB1RThis credential authorizes the holder to teach only the subject matter content typically included for the introductory       
SMAB2Rsubject or subjects listed, in curriculum guidelines and textbooks approved for study in grades 9 and below to students in   
SMAB3Rpreschool, kindergarten, grades 1-12, or in classes organized primarily for adults.                                          
SPBA1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners limited to the grades authorized by the intern      
SPBA2Rcredential: (1) instruction for English language development; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in        
SPBA3Rin the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
SPBA4RSpanish in the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; and (4) instruction for primary language           
SPBA5R development in the language of Spanish.                                                                                     
STPE1RThe special teaching authorization in Physical Education authorizes the holder to teach physical education courses in basic  
STPE2Rmilitary drill and physical fitness training in grades 12 and below, and classes organized primarily for adults.  Nothing    
STPE3Rcontained herein is intended to otherwise limit or in any way modify the authority of a local governing board under          
STPE4R Code section 51225.3(b).                                                                                                    
TAL11RThis license certifies that the holder has completed a Teacher Assistant Associate of Arts Degree program and passed the     
TAL12RCommission's Teacher Assistant License Assessment.                                                                           
TC1S1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach the subject area(s) listed, to provide English learners instruction for English 
TC1S2Rlanguage development and specially designed content instruction delivered in English in single-subject matter                
TC1S3R(departmentalized) courses as authorized on this document in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes    
TC1S4Rorganized primarily for adults.                                                                                              
TC2M1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach all subjects in a self-contained class and, as a self-contained classroom       
TC2M2Rteacher, to team teach or to regroup students across classrooms, to provide English learners instruction for English         
TC2M3Rdevelopment and specially designed content instruction delivered in English in multiple-subject-matter (self-contained)      
TC2M4Rclasses in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults, or                   
TC2M5R single-subject-matter (departmentalized) courses as authorized by any supplementary authorization listed in grades nine and 
TC2M6Rbelow.  In addition, this document authorizes the holder to teach core classes consisting of two or more subjects to the     
TC2M7Rgroup of students in grades five through eight, and to teach any of the core subjects he or she is teaching to a single      
TC2M8R group of students in the same grade level as the core for less than fifty percent of his or her work day.                   
TC2N1RThis document authorizes the holder to teach all subjects in a self-contained class and, as a self-contained classroom       
TC2N2Rteacher, to team teach or to regroup students across classrooms, to provide English learners instruction for English         
TC2N3Rdevelopment and specially designed content instruction delivered in English in multiple-subject-matter (self-contained)      
TC2N4Rclasses in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.  In addition, this   
TC2N5R document authorizes the holder to teach core classes consisting of two or more subjects to same group of students in grades 
TC2N6Rfive through eight, and to teach any of the core subjects he or she is teaching to a single group of students in the same    
TC2N7Rgrade level as the core for less than fifty percent of his or her work day.                                                  
VIBA1RThe following instructional services may be provided to English learners limited to the grades authorized by the intern      
VIBA2Rcredential: (1) instruction for English language development; (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in        
VIBA3Rin the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; (3) content instruction delivered in the language of       
VIBA4RVietnamese in the subjects and programs authorized by the intern credential; and (4) instruction for primary language        
VIBA5R development in the language of Vietnamese.                                                                                  
XAO 1SThis credential authorizes the holder to teach any course in classes organized primarily for adults.                         
XCJR1This Special Certificate of Appreciation is awarded to Cathy Jean Riggins, credential candidate, in recognition of her       
XCJR2outstanding undergraduate achievements at San Diego State University.  It also recognizes Cathy for her creative and loving  
XCJR3dedication to the children of the Lemon Grove School District and for the courage with which she has faced a difficult       
XCJR4illness while pursuing the profession she loves.  Thank you, Cathy, for your contribution to education in the state of       
XCJR5California.                                                                                                                  
XCTC1This special certificate of appreciation is awarded for service to the public school community of California as a Governor-  
XCTC2appointed representative of elementary teachers on the Commission on Teacher Credentialing.  With the awarding of this       
XCTC3certificate, the Commission wishes to recognize Carmen Ribera's integrity and her dedication to the children who attend      
XCTC4California's public schools.                                                                                                 
XDCC1This credential authorizes the holder to teach auto body repair and refinishing classes within the Chuckawalla Valley State  
XDCC2Prison facility of the California Department of Corrections only.                                                            
XDCO1GThis credential authorizes the holder to teach multiple-subject-matter (self-contained) classes for the Department of        
XDCO2GCorrections only.                                                                                                            
XNV 1STHIS CREDENTIAL IS NOT VALID FOR TEACHING IN CALIFORNIA PUBLIC SCHOOLS GRADES KINDERGARTEN THROUGH TWELVE.                   
XO  1This Special Certificate of Appreciation is awarded for thoughtful and intelligent service as an ex-officio member of the    
XO  2Commission on Teacher Credentialing.                                                                                         
XPUB1This special certificate of appreciation is awarded for service to the public school community of California as a Governor-  
XPUB2appointed representative on the Commission on Teacher Credentialing.  With the awarding of this certificate, the Commission  
XPUB3wishes to recognize George M. Silliman's wise counsel, fiscal acumen, ability to see any task through to completion, and     
XPUB4spirit of goodwill thoughout his years of service to the Commission.                                                         
ZZZZ1Contact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
