1   1 To renew this credential, the holder needs to submit only an application and fee to the Commission prior to the expiration   
1   2 date.  The renewal period is five years.                                                                                     
10A11PThis permit has been extended to allow the holder time to complete the remainder of the course work which he or she was      
10A12Punable to finish during the five-year term of the regular permit due to exceptional circumstances.  To renew this permit,    
10A13Pthe holder must verify the completion of fifteen semester hours of course work leading to a bachelor's degree taken at a     
10A14Pregionally accredited college or university since the date the permit being extended was issued.                             
10A21PThis permit has been extended for one year to allow the holder time to complete course work which he or she was unable to    
10A22Pfinish during the five-year term of the regular permit due to exceptional circumstances.  An additional one-year extension   
10A23Pmay be issued when the holder completes a minimum of eight semester hours of course work leading to a bachelor's degree      
10A24Ptaken at a regionally accredited college or university.  To renew this permit for a full five-year term, the holder must     
10A25Pverify the completion of fifteen semester hours of course work leading to a bachelor's degree taken at a regionally          
10A26Paccredited college or university since the date the permit being extended was issued.                                        
10AF1PThe holder of this emergency permit has used the appeal available one time only to applicants who, due to exceptional        
10AF2Pcircumstances, were unable to complete the required course work for renewal.  No further appeal will be issued and this      
10AF3Pemergency permit may not be renewed.  To receive a regular permit, the holder must verify the completion of the following    
10AF4Prequirements: twenty-four semester hours of course work in early childhood education, two years or the equivalent of         
10AF5Pexperience in a child development program, and sixteen semester hours of course work in general education.                   
10AR1PThe holder of this emergency permit has used the appeal available one time only to applicants who, due to exceptional        
10AR2Pcircumstances, were unable to complete the required course work for renewal.  No further appeal will be issued. To renew     
10AR3Pthis emergency permit for an additional three-year period, the holder must complete ten semester hours of course work        
10AR4Papplicable toward a regular permit or a bachelor's degree from a regionally accredited college or university and must        
10AR5Preceive a completed statement of need from the employing district, county, or agency.  To receive a regular permit, the      
10AR6Pholder must verify the completion of the following requirements: twenty-four semester hours of course work in early          
10AR7Pchildhood education, two years or the equivalent of experience in a child development program, and sixteen semester hours of 
10AR8Pcourse work in general education.                                                                                            
10CF1PThis emergency permit may not be renewed.  To receive a regular permit, the holder must verify the completion of the         
10CF2Pfollowing requirements: twenty-four semester hours of course work in early childhood education, two years or the equivalent  
10CF3Pof experience in a child development program, and sixteen semester hours of course work in general education.                
10CI1PTo renew this emergency permit for a three-year period, the holder must verify completion of eight semester hours of course  
10CI2Pwork applicable toward a regular permit or a bachelor's degree from a regionally accredited college or university and must   
10CI3Preceive a completed statement of need from the employing district, county, or agency.  To receive a regular permit, the      
10CI4Pholder must verify the completion of the following requirements: twenty-four semester hours of course work in early          
10CI5Pchildhood education, two years or the equivalent of experience in a child development program, and sixteen semester hours of 
10CI6Pcourse work in general education.                                                                                            
10CR1PTo renew this emergency permit for a three-year period, the holder must complete ten semester hours of course work           
10CR2Papplicable toward a regular permit or a bachelor's degree from a regionally accredited college or university and must        
10CR3Preceive a completed statement of need from the employing district, county, or agency.  To receive a regular permit, the      
10CR4Pholder must verify the completion of the following requirements: twenty-four semester hours of course work in early          
10CR5Pchildhood education, two years or the equivalent of experience in a child development program, and sixteen semester hours of 
10CR6Pcourse work in general education.                                                                                            
10LF1PThis limited permit may not be renewed.  To receive a regular permit, the holder must verify the completion of the following 
10LF2Prequirements: twenty-four semester hours of course work in early childhood education, two years or the equivalent of         
10LF3Pexperience in a child development program, and sixteen semester hours of course work in general education.                   
10LI1PTo renew this limited permit for a three-year period, the holder must verify completion of an additional six semester hours  
10LI2Pof course work applicable toward a regular permit or a bachelor's degree from a regionally accredited college or university. 
10LI3PTo receive a regular permit, the holder must verify the completion of the following requirements: twenty-four semester       
10LI4Phours of course work in early childhood education, two years or the equivalent of experience in a child development          
10LI5P program, and sixteen semester hours of course work in general education.                                                    
10LR1PTo renew this limited permit for a three-year period, the holder must verify completion of an additional nine semester hours 
10LR2Pof course work applicable toward a regular permit or a bachelor's degree from a regionally accredited college or university. 
10LR3PTo receive a regular permit, the holder must verify the completion of the following requirements: twenty-four semester       
10LR4Phours of course work in early childhood education, two years or the equivalent of experience in a child development          
10LR5P program, and sixteen semester hours of course work in general education.                                                    
10ND1PTo renew this regular permit for an additional five-year period, the holder must verify the completion of a minimum of       
10ND2Pfifteen semester hours of additional course work leading to a bachelor's degree taken at a regionally accredited college or  
10ND3Puniversity.                                                                                                                  
10R 1PTo renew this regular permit for an additional five-year period, the holder needs to submit only an application and fee      
10R 2Pprior to the expiration date.                                                                                                
10RG1PTo renew this regular permit for an additional five-year period, the holder needs to submit only an application and fee      
10RG2Pprior to the expiration date.                                                                                                
10SR1PTo renew this regular permit for an additional five-year period, the holder needs to submit only an application and fee      
10SR2Pprior to the expiration date.  To receive the life permit, the holder must verify the completion of five years of experience 
10SR3Pin the last ten years, earned while possessing or being eligible for the permit, at least two years of which must have been  
10SR4Pcontinuous full-time employment while holding a regular supervision permit.  A year of experience is paid or volunteer       
10SR5Pservice in a child development program for not less than two hours per day, for at least one hundred days during not more    
10SR6Pthan three school years.                                                                                                     
111A1 Complete 6 units from the letter.                                                                                            
111B1 Complete 12 units from the letter.                                                                                           
111C1 Complete 6 units at an approved college.                                                                                     
111D1 Complete 12 units at an approved college.                                                                                    
112 1 Complete the remaining requirements.                                                                                         
113 1 Include a recommendation from an approved college.                                                                           
114 1 Complete the requirements on the letter.                                                                                     
115 1 Contact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
116 1 Complete methods of teaching reading.                                                                                        
117 1 Contact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
118 1 Contact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
119 1 Contact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
12  1PTo renew this permit for an additional five-year period, the holder must complete a minimum of 105 clock hours of planned    
12  2Pand approved professional growth activities as described in "The California Professional Growth Manual for Child Development 
12  3PPermits".                                                                                                                    
120 1 Contact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
122 1STo renew this credential, the holder needs to submit only an application and fee to the Commission prior to the expiration   
122 2Sdate.  The renewal period is five years.                                                                                     
123 1 need U.S. constitution.                                                                                                      
124 1STo renew this credential, the holder needs to submit only an application and fee to the Commission prior to the expiration   
124 2Sdate.  The renewal period is ten years.                                                                                      
12B11PThis Associate Teacher Permit may only be renewed once.  To renew this permit the holder must complete a minimum of fifteen  
12B12Psemester units of course work applicable toward the Child Development Teacher Permit.                                        
12B21PThis Associate Teacher Permit may not be renewed.  To receive the Child Development Teacher Permit the holder must verify    
12B22Pcompletion of the following requirements: either (1) twenty-four semester units of course work in early childhood            
12B23Peducation/child development, 175 days of experience in an instructional capacity in a child care and development program,    
12B24Pand sixteen semester units in general education, or (2) an associate or higher degree in early childhood education/child     
12B25Pdevelopment or a related field, including a three-semester-unit field experience, or the equivalent, in an early childhood   
12B26Psetting, or (3) equivalent training.                                                                                         
12E 1PThis is the holder's one-time two-year extension of his or her Child Development Permit.  No further extensions will be      
12E 2Pissued.  Before a five-year permit will be issued, the holder must verify that 105 clock hours of planned and approved       
12E 3Pprofessional growth activities as described in "The California Professional Growth Manual for Child Development Permits"     
12E 4Phave been completed since the last five-year permit was issued.                                                              
12I 1PRegulations allow the holder of this initial issuance of a Child Development Permit to upgrade to a more advanced permit     
12I 2Pwithin three years of the issuance date of this document for one-half of the application fee in effect at the time that the  
12I 3Papplication is submitted.  The application must include all supporting materials to verify that the holder qualifies for the 
12I 4Pnew Child Development Permit.                                                                                                
12U 1PTo renew this permit for an additional five-year period, the holder must complete a minimum of 105 clock hours of planned    
12U 2Pand approved professional growth activities as described in "The California Professional Growth Manual for Child Development 
12U 3PPermits."  The holder has already used his or her one-time two-year extension available for Child Development Permits; the   
12U 4Pprofessional growth requirements must be completed before another permit can be issued.                                      
13971RThis Emergency 30-Day Substitute Permit was issued under SB 1397 (2022) and did not require the holder to meet the Basic     
13972RSkills Requirement. This permit may be renewed without meeting the Basic Skills Requirement. The waiver of this requirement  
13973Rin the bill does not extend to any other document issued by the Commission on Teacher Credentialing.                         
1CL 1PTo renew this permit for an additional five-year period, the holder must submit verification by the administrative officer   
1CL 2Pof the employing agency of a minimum of five months of successful experience in a children's center program within the two   
1CL 3Pyears immediately preceding application for renewal.                                                                         
2   1 Contact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
20  1 Contact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
221 1 Complete requirements on the letter for clear.                                                                               
222 1 No more partial renewals are available.                                                                                      
223 1 Contact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
224 1 Contact UCB or UCLA for program.                                                                                             
225 1 Complete 12 units acceptable to UCB or UCLA.                                                                                 
226 1 Complete 60 hours voc ed for clear.                                                                                          
232 1 Contact institution with voc ag for program.                                                                                 
233 1 Complete 6 units acceptable to voc ag institution.                                                                           
234 1 Complete requirements on letter for clear.                                                                                   
235 1 Complete requirements on letter for clear.                                                                                   
236 1 The holder may renew this credential for a period of validity not to exceed that of the prerequisite credential.  If the     
236 2 prerequisite credential is valid for life, the holder may renew this credential for five-year periods.                       
26  1 To renew this credential, the holder needs to submit only an application and fee to the Commission prior to the expiration   
26  2 date.  The renewal period is five years.                                                                                     
29  1 Contact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
2C  1PTo renew this permit for an additional two-year period, the holder needs to submit only an application form and fee to the   
2C  2PCommission prior to the expiration date.                                                                                     
2CL 1PTo renew this permit for an additional two-year period, the holder needs to submit only an application and fee to the        
2CL 2PCommission prior to the expiration date.  To receive this permit for life, the holder must verify a minimum of one year of   
2CL 3Psuccessful experience in a children's center program within the two years immediately preceding application for renewal.     
2P  1PTo renew this postponed permit for an additional two-year period, the holder must complete a minimum of four semester hours  
2P  2Pof course work toward a bachelor's degree from a regionally accredited college or university.  To receive a regular permit   
2P  3Pwhich may be renewed without further course work, the holder must verify completion of a bachelor's degree and twelve        
2P  4Psemester hours of course work selected from the areas of child development, child psychology, early childhood education,     
2P  5Pfamily life education, or other appropriate behavioral science.                                                              
2PO 1PTo renew this provisional permit for an additional two-year period, the holder must verify the successful completion of one  
2PO 2Pyear of experience during the valid period of this permit and must apply for the renewal before this permit expires.         
2PP 1PTo renew this postponed permit for an additional two-year period, the holder must complete a minimum of four semester hours  
2PP 2Pof course work toward a bachelor's degree from a regionally accredited college or university.  To receive this permit for    
2PP 3Plife, the holder must verify completion of the following: a bachelor's degree; twelve semester hours of course work selected 
2PP 4Pfrom the areas of child development, child psychology, early childhood education, family life education, or other            
2PP 5Pappropriate behavioral science; and one year of experience in a children's center program within the two years immediately   
2PP 6Ppreceding the application for renewal.                                                                                       
3   1 Contact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
311 1 Complete 10 units from evaluation letter.                                                                                    
314 1 One year renewal available in internship program.                                                                            
315 1 This credential is not renewable on internship basis.                                                                        
316 1 Submit verification completion of coursework from district.                                                                  
317 1 Complete all remaining requirements on letter.                                                                               
318 1 The holder may renew this credential for a period of validity not to exceed that of the prerequisite credential.  If the     
318 2 prerequisite credential is valid for life, the holder may renew this credential for five-year periods.                       
319 1 Complete 12 units from evaluation letter.                                                                                    
32  1 Contact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
320 1 Complete 6 units from evaluation letter.                                                                                     
321 1 Complete 10 units in ed program.                                                                                             
324 1 Complete 10 units in school nurse program.                                                                                   
325 1 Complete all remaining units in school nurse program.                                                                        
326 1 Submit verification met institution's program requirements.                                                                  
327 1 To renew this credential, the holder needs to submit only an application and fee to the Commission prior to the expiration   
327 2 date.  The renewal period is five years.                                                                                     
329 1 Complete all remaining course work in approved program.                                                                      
33  1 Contact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
34  1 Contact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
35  1 The holder may renew this credential for a period of validity not to exceed that of the prerequisite credential.  If the     
35  2 prerequisite credential is valid for life, the holder may renew this credential for five-year periods.                       
36  1 Contact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
36EX1RThe holder must verify completion of a 36-week, full-time, mentored clinical experience or equivalent supervised practicum.  
36EX2RPossession of a valid California Speech-Language Pathology License issued by the California Speech-Language Pathology and    
36EX3RAudiology Board or an original Certification Letter from the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA) verifying   
36EX4Rpossession of a valid Certificate of Clinical Competence in Speech-Language Pathology satisfies this requirement             
3C  1PTo renew this permit for an additional two-year period, the holder needs to submit only an application and fee to the        
3C  2PCommission prior to the expiration date.                                                                                     
3CL 1PTo renew this permit for an additional two-year period, the holder needs to submit only an application and fee prior to the  
3CL 2Pexpiration date.  To renew this permit for life, the holder must verify the completion of a minimum of one year of           
3CL 3Psuccessful experience completed during the valid period of this permit.  A year of experience is paid or volunteer service   
3CL 4Pin a child development program for not less than two hours per day, for at least one hundred days during not more than three 
3CL 5Pschool years.                                                                                                                
3PP 1PTo renew this postponed permit for an additional two-year period, the holder must complete a minimum of four semester hours  
3PP 2Pof course work toward a bachelor's degree or in early childhood education.  To receive the regular permit, the holder must   
3PP 3Pverify possession of the bachelor's degree from a regionally accredited college or university and completion of a minimum of 
3PP 4Psixteen semester hours of course work in early childhood education.                                                          
3SP 1PTo renew this postponed permit for an additional two-year period, the holder must verify the successful completion of four   
3SP 2Psemester hours of course work in early childhood education and one year of experience as a teacher or supervisor in a child  
3SP 3Pdevelopment program completed during the valid period of this permit.  A year of experience is paid or volunteer service in  
3SP 4Pa child development program for not less than two hours per day, for at least one hundred days during not more than three    
3SP 5Pschool years.  To receive the clear permit, the holder must verify possession of a bachelor's degree with a major in early   
3SP 6Pchildhood education or child development (or eighteen semester hours of course work in early childhood education or child    
3SP 7Pdevelopment), plus six semester hours of course work covering administration and supervision of a child development program. 
4   1 Contact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
4CD 1PTo renew this emergency permit for an additonal two-year period, the holder must complete a minimum of twelve semester hours 
4CD 2Pof course work applicable toward the regular permit or a bachelor's degree, and must receive a completed statement of need   
4CD 3Pfrom the employing district, county, or agency.  To receive the regular permit, the holder must verify the completion of the 
4CD 4Pfollowing requirements: twenty-four semester hours of course work in early childhood education, two years or the equivalent  
4CD 5Pof experience in child development program, and sixteen semester hours of course work in general education.                  
4R  1PTo renew this permit for an additional five-year period, the holder needs to submit only an application and fee to the       
4R  2PCommission prior to the expiration date.                                                                                     
4RG 1PTo renew this regular permit for an additonal five-year period, the holder needs to submit only an application and fee to    
4RG 2Pthe Commission prior to the expiration date.  To receive the life permit, the holder must verify the completion of a         
4RG 3Pbachelor's or higher degree from a regionally accredited college or university and five years of full-time experience in the 
4RG 4Plast ten years, earned while possessing or being eligible for this permit, at least two years of which must be continuous    
4RG 5Pfull-time employment while holding a regular permit.  A year of experience is paid or volunteer service in a child           
4RG 6Pdevelopment program for not less than two hours per day, for at least one hundred days during not more than three school     
4RG 7Pyears.                                                                                                                       
4SR 1PTo renew this regular permit for an additonal five-year period, the holder needs to submit only an application and fee to    
4SR 2Pthe Commission prior to the expiration date.  To receive the life permit, the holder must verify the completion of five      
4SR 3Pyears of full-time experience in the last ten years, earned while possessing or being eligible for this permit, at least two 
4SR 4Pyears of which must be continuous full-time employment while holding a regular supervision permit.  A year of experience is  
4SR 5Ppaid or volunteer service in a child development program for not less than two hours per day, for at least one hundred days  
4SR 6Pduring not more than three school years.                                                                                     
5   1 Contact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
5CL 1PTo renew this permit, the holder must verify the completion of two years of successful experience in a special center during 
5CL 2Pthe valid period of this permit and must complete either nine semester hours of course work leading to a bachelor's degree   
5CL 3Por a teaching credential or 150 clock hours of staff development planned with and verified by the special center site        
5CL 4Padministrator.                                                                                                               
60  1 Contact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
62  1 Contact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
63  1 Contact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
67  1 To renew this credential, the holder needs to submit only an application and fee to the Commission prior to the expiration   
67  2 date.  The renewal period is five years.                                                                                     
69  1 The holder may renew this credential for a period of validity not to exceed that of the prerequisite credential or           
69  2 credentials.  If the prerequisite credential or credentials are valid for life, the holder may renew this credential for     
69  3 five-year periods.                                                                                                           
72  1 Contact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
A10 1RThe holder of this permit has used the appeal available one time only to applicants who, due to exceptional circumstances,   
A10 2Rwere unable to complete the required course work for renewal.  Appropriate course work must be completed for each subsequent 
A10 3Rrenewal of this permit.                                                                                                      
A10L1RThe holder of this emergency permit has used the appeal available one time only to applicants who, due to exceptional        
A10L2Rcircumstances, were unable to take and pass the required test(s) or complete the required course work for renewal.  The      
A10L3Rappropriate test(s) must be passed or course work completed for each subsequent renewal of this emergency permit.            
A11 1RThe holder of this emergency permit has used the appeal available one time only to applicants who, due to exceptional        
A11 2Rcircumstances, did not apply for admission to an appropriate Commission-approved professional preparation program. Program   
A11 3Radmission must be verified for each subsequent renewal of this emergency permit.                                             
A12 1RThis emergency permit has been issued on the basis of an appeal because the holder has not been admitted to an appropriate   
A12 2RCommission-approved professional preparation program.  The holder must complete a minimum of six semester hours of course    
A12 3Rwork that satisfy the requirements specified by the college or university for admission to the program.                      
AEP31RTo renew this credential, the holder must complete two years of successful teaching, an approved program of personalized     
AEP32Rpreparation, U.S. Constitution, Health Education, Computer Technology, and must receive the recommendation of a              
AEP33RCommission-approved Adult Education program sponsor.                                                                         
AIP21RThis credential may not be renewed.  To qualify for the three-year preliminary American Indian Language-Culture Credential,  
AIP22Rthe holder must obtain the recommendation from the tribal government of a federally recognized Indian tribe located in       
AIP23RCalifornia.                                                                                                                  
AIP31RThis credential may not be renewed.  To qualify for the five-year clear American Indian Language-Cultural Credential, the    
AIP32Rholder must obtain the recommendation from the tribal government of a federally recognized Indian tribe located in           
AIP33RCalifornia, in consultation with the holder's public school employer.                                                        
APA 1RPer Executive Order, the credential holder must complete a Commission-approved Administrator Performance Assessment (APA)    
APA 2Rprior to issuance of the clear credential.                                                                                   
BIPT1RThis authorization may not be renewed.  Please contact a Commission-approved CTE program sponsor if you are interested in    
BIPT2Robtaining a preliminary or clear Career Technical Education Teaching Credential.                                             
C8  1RThis authorization need not be renewed and shall remain in force as long as the valid prerequisite is held concurrently.     
CA2X1RThis two-year extension is to allow the holder additional time to meet the requirements for a clear credential. To meet the  
CA2X2Rrequirements for a clear credential, the holder must complete a Commission-approved induction program and all other renewal  
CA2X3Rrequirements listed on the document (as applicable).                                                                         
CA3X1RThis three-year extension is to allow the holder additional time to meet the requirements for a clear credential. To meet    
CA3X2Rthe requirements for a clear credential, the holder must complete a Commission-approved induction program and all other      
CA3X3Rrenewal requirements listed on the document (as applicable).                                                                 
CBWB1RRegardless of the expiration date, this credential expires with the State Board of Education Waiver if the holder does not   
CBWB2Rpass the California Basic Educational Skills Test (CBEST).  If the holder passes CBEST, he or she may substitute until the   
CBWB3Rexpiration date.  To continue to serve as a substitute teacher after this credential expires, the holder must apply through  
CBWB4Rthe school district or county office of education where he or she is employed or is seeking employment and must include the  
CBWB5RCBEST Verification Transcript with the application.                                                                          
CBWP1RRegardless of the expiration date, this permit expires with the State Board of Education Waiver if the holder does not pass  
CBWP2Rthe California Basic Educational Skills Test (CBEST).  If the holder passes CBEST, he or she may continue to serve on this   
CBWP3Rpermit until the expiration date.                                                                                            
CBWW1RRegardless of the expiration date, this credential expires with the State Board of Education Waiver if the holder does not   
CBWW2Rpass the California Basic Educational Skills Test (CBEST).  If the holder passes CBEST, he or she may substitute until the   
CBWW3Rexpiration date.  To continue to serve as a substitute teacher after this credential expires, the holder must verify         
CBWW4Rcompletion of a baccalaureate or higher degree from a regionally accredited college or university; must apply through the    
CBWW5Rschool district or county office of education where he or she is employed or is seeking employment; and must include the     
CBWW6RCBEST Verification Transcript with the application.                                                                          
CC  1RThe renewal period for this certificate is five years.  To renew this certificate the holder must go to www.ctc.ca.gov and   
CC  2Rsubmit an online application and fee.                                                                                        
CE1 1 The holder must complete the Foundational Computer Education requirement.                                                    
CE2 1 The holder must complete the Advanced Computer Education requirement.                                                        
COMP1RThe holder must complete a course in general and specialized skills in the use of computers in educational settings or pass  
COMP2Rthe Preliminary Educational Technology Test.                                                                                 
CPR 1RThe holder must verify completion of training in cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) which included infant, child, and adult 
CPR 2RCPR skills.                                                                                                                  
CU  1 Contact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
D1U 1RThis one-year preliminary credential may be renewed for the remainder of the five-year preliminary time period provided by   
D1U 2Rlaw upon the completion of either a two-semester-hour course or an examination covering the provisions and principles of the 
D1U 3RU.S. Constitution.  During the first two years of the five-year preliminary time period that begins with the issuance of     
D1U 4Rthis document, to continue employment the holder must also complete the Level I requirements of an approved program of       
D1U 5Rpersonalized preparation and have them verified to the employing school district.  Before the end of the five-years, the     
D1U 6Rholder must complete the remaining requirements for the clear credential:  two years of successful teaching, the Level II    
D1U 7Rrequirements of an approved program of personalized preparation, and the health education unit; and must receive the         
D1U 8Rrecommendation of a Commission-approved Local Education Agency or employing school district.                                 
DA  1RThis document has been issued on the basis of an appeal after the initial credential with this title became inactive. During 
DA  2Rthe one-year period of this appeal, the holder must complete the Level I requirements of an approved program of personalized 
DA  3Rpreparation through a Commission-approved Local Education Agency.   When the holder verifies completion of Level I           
DA  4Rrequirements to his or her employer, the initial credential becomes valid again.  The holder should not send verification of 
DA  5Rthe completion of the Level I requirements to the Commission until he or she applies for the Clear Credential.               
DA1 1RThis document has been issued on the basis of an appeal to allow the holder up to one additional year during which to        
DA1 2Rcomplete all of the requirements listed.                                                                                     
DF  1RThe holder must verify completion of the Level I requirements to the employing school district within two years of the date  
DF  2Rof issuance in order for this credential to remain valid.  To renew this credential, the holder must complete two years of   
DF  3Rsuccessful teaching, the Level I and Level II requirements of an approved program of personalized preparation, and the       
DF  4Rhealth education unit, and must receive the recommendation of a Commission-approved Local Education Agency or an employing   
DF  5Rschool district.  This document will remain valid, for the period indicated, provided the holder completes Level I           
DF  6Rrequirements within two-years of issuance.                                                                                   
DFA 1RFor each five-year renewal of this credential, the holder must complete 100 clock hours of planned and approved professional 
DFA 2Rgrowth activities as specified in "The California Professional Growth Manual".                                               
DFAE1RThis is the holder's one-time two-year reinstatement of his or her professional clear credential.  Before another five-year  
DFAE2Rprofessional clear credential will be issued, the holder must verify completion of 100 clock hours of planned and approved   
DFAE3Rprofessional growth activities as specified in "The California Professional Growth Manual" since the last five-year          
DFAE4Rprofessional clear credential was issued.                                                                                    
DFAU1RThe holder has already used the one-time two-year reinstatement available for this credential and must complete 100 clock    
DFAU2Rhours of planned and approved professional growth activities as specified in "The California Professional Growth Manual"     
DFAU3Rbefore another professional clear credential will be issued.                                                                 
DFV 1RFor each five-year renewal of this credential, the holder must complete 150 clock hours of planned and approved professional 
DFV 2Rgrowth activities as specified in "The California Professional Growth Manual".                                               
DFVE1RThis is the holder's one-time two-year reinstatement of his or her professional clear credential.  Before another five-year  
DFVE2Rprofessional clear credential will be issued, the holder must verify completion of 150 clock hours of planned and approved   
DFVE3Rprofessional growth activities as specified in "The California Professional Growth Manual" since the last five-year          
DFVE4Rprofessional clear credential was issued.                                                                                    
DFVU1RThe holder has already used the one-time two-year reinstatement available for this credential and must complete 150 clock    
DFVU2Rhours of planned and approved professional growth activities as specified in "The California Professional Growth Manual"     
DFVU3Rbefore another professional clear credential will be issued.                                                                 
DG  1RTo renew this credential, the holder must complete two years of successful teaching, an approved program of personalized     
DG  2Rpreparation, U.S. Constitution, Health Education, Computer Technology, and must receive the recommendation of a              
DG  3RCommission-approved Career Technical Education (CTE) program sponsor.                                                        
DP  1RThe holder must verify completion of the Level I requirements to the employing school district within two years of the date  
DP  2Rof issuance in order for this credential to remain valid.  To renew this credential, the holder must complete two years of   
DP  3Rsuccessful teaching, the Level I requirements of an approved program of personalized preparation, and the health education   
DP  4Runit, and must receive the recommendation of a Commission-approved Local Education Agency or an employing school district.   
DPA 1RFor each five-year renewal of this credential, the holder must complete 50 clock hours of planned and approved professional  
DPA 2Rgrowth activities as specified in "The California Professional Growth Manual".                                               
DPAE1RThis is the holder's one-time two-year reinstatement of his or her professional clear credential.  Before another five-year  
DPAE2Rprofessional clear credential will be issued, the holder must verify completion of 50 clock hours of planned and approved    
DPAE3Rprofessional growth activities as specified in "The California Professional Growth Manual" since the last five-year          
DPAE4Rprofessional clear credential was issued.                                                                                    
DPAU1RThe holder has already used the one-time two-year reinstatement available for this credential and must complete 50 clock     
DPAU2Rhours of planned and approved professional growth activities as specified in "The California Professional Growth Manual"     
DPAU3Rbefore another professional clear credential will be issued.                                                                 
DPV 1RFor each five-year renewal of this credential, the holder must complete 75 clock hours of planned and approved professional  
DPV 2Rgrowth activities and two years of work experience, other than teaching, directly related to the subject listed, as          
DPV 3Rspecified in "The California Professional Growth Manual".                                                                    
DPVE1RThis is the holder's one-time two-year reinstatement of his or her professional clear credential.  Before another five-year  
DPVE2Rprofessional clear credential will be issued, the holder must verify completion of 75 clock hours of planned and approved    
DPVE3Rprofessional growth activities and two years of work experience, other than teaching, directly related to the subject listed 
DPVE4Ras specified in "The California Professional Growth Manual" since the last five-year professional clear credential was       
DPVE5Rissued.                                                                                                                      
DPVU1RThe holder has already used the one-time two-year reinstatement available for this credential and must complete 75 clock     
DPVU2Rhours of planned and approved professional growth activities and two years of work experience, other than teaching, directly 
DPVU3Rrelated to the subject listed as specified in "The California Professional Growth Manual" before another professional clear  
DPVU4Rcredential will be issued.                                                                                                   
DRA 1RTo renew this credential, the holder must complete the requirement for successful teaching by teaching a minimum of one      
DRA 2Rcourse in each of four terms within the valid period of the preliminary credential, including at least two terms with one    
DRA 3Remploying school district.                                                                                                   
DRV 1RTo renew this credential, the holder must complete the requirement for successful teaching either by teaching a minimum of   
DRV 2Rone course in each of four terms within the valid period of the preliminary credential, including at least two terms with    
DRV 3Rone employing school district, or by participating in a minimum of 360 clock hours of supervised occupational student        
DRV 4Rteaching.                                                                                                                    
DT  1RTo renew this credential, the holder must complete an approved program of personalized preparation as established by an      
DT  2Rapproved Local Education Agency, two years of successful teaching, the health education unit, and must receive a             
DT  3Rrecommendation from the Local Education Agency or employing school district.                                                 
DTU 1RThis one-year preliminary credential may be renewed for the remainder of the five-year preliminary time period provided by   
DTU 2Rlaw upon the completion of either a two-semester-hour course or an examination covering the provisions and principles of the 
DTU 3RU.S. Constitution.  Before the end of the five-year preliminary time period, the holder must complete an approved program of 
DTU 4Rpersonalized preparation as established by an approved Local Education Agency, two years of successful teaching, the health  
DTU 5Reducation unit, and must receive a recommendation from the Local Education Agency or the employing school district.          
EM1 1RThis is the holder's initial emergency permit.  By regulation, this permit may be reissued for a maximum of two additional   
EM1 2Rone-year periods provided the holder meets the requirements listed.                                                          
EM2 1RThis is the holder's second emergency permit.  By regulation, this permit may be reissued for a maximum of one additional    
EM2 2Rone-year period provided the holder meets the requirements listed.                                                           
EM3 1RThis is the holder's final emergency permit. This permit may not be reissued.  To continue in the current assignment, the    
EM3 2Rholder must complete the requirements for the preliminary or clear document that authorizes this service.                    
EM4 1RRegulation amendments effective January 1, 2014, limit the number of reissuances on an emergency permit to two one-year      
EM4 2Rperiods.  This is the holder's second emergency permit, which may be reissued for a maximum of one additional one-year       
EM4 3Rperiod provided the holder meets the requirements listed.                                                                    
EM5 1RRegulation amendments effective January 1, 2014, limit the number of reissuances on an emergency permit to two one-year      
EM5 2Rperiods.  This is the holder's third and final emergency permit.  To continue in the current assignment, the holder must     
EM5 3Rcomplete the requirements for the preliminary or clear document that authorizes this service.                                
EXAM1RThe holder must take the appropriate subject matter competency examination or examinations at their first regularly          
EXAM2Rscheduled administrations following the date of issuance of this emergency permit.  The employing agency must discontinue    
EXAM3Remployment of the holder eight weeks thereafter unless the holder provides the employer with evidence of having passed the   
EXAM4Rrequired subject matter examination(s).                                                                                      
HEAL1RThe holder must complete a course in health education including nutrition, the effects of abuse of alcohol, narcotics, and   
HEAL2Rdrugs and the use of tobacco.  The holder must also complete training in CPR that meets the standards set by the American    
HEAL3RHeart Association in its B-level course or the community CPR course provided by the American Red Cross.                      
L12 1RThis authorization may be issued a maximum of three times.  To renew this authorization for an additional school year, the   
L12 2Rholder must consent to the assignment and the authorization must be enacted by resolution of the governing board of the      
L12 3Rschool district. This authorization may not be renewed after June 30, 1991, the sunset date of Education Code Section        
L12 4R44258.5.                                                                                                                     
L12F1RThis is the third and final issuance of this authorization.  It may not be renewed.  To continue to serve in the position    
L12F2Rauthorized by this document, the holder must either qualify for the appropriate credential or be authorized by other legal   
L12F3Rassignment options approved by his or her employer.                                                                          
MILR1PThis document is not renewable and is limited to the term of the holder's initial California military service assignment.    
MILR2PTo continue serving as an educator, the holder must formally apply for the corresponding California credential or permit     
MILR3Pbased on current preparation requirements no later than the expiration date. For more information, please see Coded          
MILR4P Correspondence 23-08 at www.ctc.ca.gov.                                                                                     
MILR1RThis document is not renewable and is limited to the term of the holder's initial California military service assignment.    
MILR2RTo continue serving as an educator, the holder must formally apply for the corresponding California credential or permit     
MILR3Rbased on current preparation requirements no later than the expiration date. For more information, please see Coded          
MILR4R Correspondence 23-08 at www.ctc.ca.gov.                                                                                     
NSEE1RThe holder must complete at least one semester unit of supervised field experience in general education or 45 clock hours of 
NSEE2Rexperience with non-special education students.                                                                              
NSEP1RThe holder must complete at least two semester units in non-special education pedagogy related to teaching basic academic    
NSEP2Rskills and content areas.                                                                                                    
NTED1RThe holder must take the appropriate subject matter competency examination at its first regularly scheduled administration   
NTED2Rfollowing the date of issuance of this credential.  The employer must discontinue employment of the holder eight weeks       
NTED3Rthereafter unless the holder provides the employer with evidence of having passed the examination.                           
OOS11RThis is the first issuance of a Pupil Personnel Services (PPS) credential issued under the provision of Assembly Bill 606    
OOS12R(2025). To renew this credential, the holder must demonstrate satisfactory progress as determined by the local educational   
OOS13Ragency that employs the holder. To upgrade to the Clear level, the holder should enroll in a Commission-approved PPS         
OOS14Rpreparation program and secure their formal recommendation or complete the additional requirements necessary to qualify for  
OOS15Rthe Clear Pupil Personnel Services credential through the out-of-state preparation pathway.                                  
OOS21RThis is the second and final issuance of a Preliminary Pupil Personnel Services (PPS) credential issued under the provisions 
OOS22Rof Assembly Bill 606 (2025). To upgrade to the Clear level, the holder should enroll in a Commission-approved PPS            
OOS23Rpreparation program and secure their formal recommendation or complete the additional requirements necessary to qualify for  
OOS24Rthe Clear Pupil Personnel Services credential through the out-of-state preparation pathway.                                  
P13 1RTo renew this emergency permit, the holder must pass at least TWO of the following CLAD/BCLAD tests:  Test 1 or Test 2 or    
P13 2RTest 3, if these tests, or their equivalent, were not passed before this emergency permit was issued.  If the tests were     
P13 3Rpassed, or if the holder opts to complete coursework in lieu of taking the tests, three semester units of coursework for the 
P13 4RCLAD Certificate may be substituted for each test not taken.  The holder must apply for renewal through the employing agency 
P13 5Rwhich must verify that the holder was provided with an experienced educator to guide and assist the holder throughout the    
P13 6Rterm of this permit.                                                                                                         
P15 1RTo renew this emergency permit, the holder must: (1) pass either Test II (or III depending on the specific language), IV or  
P15 2RV of the CSET: World Languages Examination if these exams, or their equivalent, were not passed before this permit was       
P15 3Rissued. If all exams have been passed, or if the individual opts to complete coursework, three semester units of coursework  
P15 4Rfrom a Commission-approved bilingual program may be substituted based on verification from the program sponsor; (2) pass     
P15 5RTest 1 or Test 2 or Test 3 of the CTELs, if these tests, or their equivalent, were not passed before this permit was issued. 
P15 6RIf all exams have been passed, or if the individual opts to complete coursework, three semester units of coursework from a   
P15 7RCommission-approved CTEL program may be substituted based on verification from the program sponsor; and (3) apply for        
P15 8Rrenewal through the employing agency which must verify that the holder was provided with an experienced educator to guide    
P15 9R and assist the holder throughout the term of this permit.                                                                   
P1811RThis is the holder's initial emergency permit.  By law, this permit may be reissued for a maximum of four additional         
P1812Rone-year periods provided the holder meets the requirements listed.                                                          
P1821RThis is the holder's second emergency permit.  By law, this permit may be reissued for a maximum of three additional         
P1822Rone-year periods provided the holder meets the requirements listed.                                                          
P1831RThis is the holder's third emergency permit.  By law, this permit may be reissued for a maximum of two additional one-year   
P1832Rperiods provided the holder meets the requirements listed.                                                                   
P1841RThis is the holder's fourth emergency permit.  By law, this permit may be reissued for a maximum of one additional one-year  
P1842Rperiod provided the holder meets the requirements listed.                                                                    
P1851RThis is the holder's final emergency permit.  This permit may not be reissued.  To continue in the current assignment, the   
P1852Rholder must complete the requirements for the preliminary or clear document that authorizes this service.                    
P1861RThis is the holder's initial emergency permit reissued under Education Code Section 44251(c), effective 1-1-98, governing    
P1862Remergency permits.  This permit may be reissued for four additional one-year periods provided the holder meets the           
P1863Rrequirements listed.                                                                                                         
P1871REmergency permits issued after July 1, 2005 will expire on June 30, 2006 not withstanding the fact previous emergency        
P1872Rpermits stated that the document may be reissued for additional years.                                                       
P18A1RTo renew this emergency permit, the holder must maintain his or her valid non-emergency teaching credential, must complete a 
P18A2Rminimum of six semester hours of course work applicable toward the credential which authorizes this service, and must apply  
P18A3Rthrough the employing agency, after receiving approval for the assignment by the local governing board.  In lieu of six      
P18A4Rsemester hours of course work, the holder who verifies three years of previous teaching experience on a non-emergency        
P18A5Rcredential may complete ninety hours of professional development activities directly related to the subject or class         
P18A6Rauthorized by this permit.  Details about the content of those professional development activities must accompany the        
P18A7Rapplication for renewal.                                                                                                     
P18B1RTo renew this emergency permit, the holder must verify admission to a college or university that has a Commission-approved   
P18B2Rprogram for both the specialist credential which authorizes this service and the teaching credential which is a              
P18B3Rprerequisite; must complete a minimum of six semester hours of course work approved by the college or university as          
P18B4Rapplicable toward those credentials; and must apply for renewal through the employing agency.  The employing agency must     
P18B5Rverify that the holder has been provided with an experienced educator to guide and assist the holder throughout the term of  
P18B6Rthis permit.                                                                                                                 
P18C1RTo renew this emergency permit, the holder must verify admission to a college or university that has a Commission-approved   
P18C2Rprogram for both the Multiple or Single Subject Teaching Credential and the specialist instruction credential which are      
P18C3Rprerequisites for the Resource Specialist Certificate; must complete a minimum of six semester hours of coursework approved  
P18C4Rby the college or university as applicable toward those credentials; and must apply for renewal through the employing        
P18C5Ragency. The employing agency must verify that the holder has been provided with an experienced educator to guide and assist  
P18C6Rthe holder throughout the term of this permit.                                                                               
P18D1RTo renew this initial issuance of the Emergency Resource Specialist Permit, the holder must: (1) attend an orientation       
P18D2Rprovided by the employing agency covering curriculum for the teaching assignment, classroom instruction, and classroom       
P18D3Rmanagement; (2) obtain an evaluation by a Commission-accredited professional preparation institution identifying the         
P18D4Rrequirements he or she must complete to be eligible for the credential that authorizes this service; (3) complete EITHER (a) 
P18D5Rsix semester units or nine quarter units of approved course work in a Commission-accredited professional preparation program 
P18D6Rthat are required for issuance of the related or prerequisite credential, or (b) a minimum of ninety hours of professional   
P18D7Rdevelopment activities that are directly related to the subject or class authorized by this emergency, provided the holder's 
P18D8Remploying agency has a Commission-approved Plan to Develop Fully Qualified Educators, or (c) hold a credential that          
P18D9Rauthorizes instruction for special education students and obtain a formal recommendation for the clear certificate from a    
P18DARCommission-approved school district, county office of education, or education agency authorized by the Commission to assess  
P18DBRand recommend for the clear certificate; (4) be assigned an experienced educator by the employing agency who will provide    
P18DCRguidance and assistance; (5) maintain his or her valid prerequisite credential (when applicable), and (6) apply for          
P18DDRreissuance through his or her employing agency.                                                                              
P18E1RTo renew this emergency permit, the holder must: (1) complete EITHER (a) six semester units or nine quarter units of         
P18E2Rapproved course work in a Commission-accredited professional preparation program that are required for issuance of the       
P18E3Rrelated or prerequisite credential, or (b) hold a credential that authorizes instruction for special education students and  
P18E4Robtain a formal recommendation for the clear certificate from a Commission-approved school district, county office of        
P18E5Reducation, or education agency authorized by the Commission, to assess and recommend for the clear certificate; (2) be       
P18E6Rassigned an experienced educator by the employing agency who will provide guidance and assistance; and (3) apply for         
P18E7Rreissuance through his or her employing agency.                                                                              
P18F1RTo renew this initial issuance of an emergency permit, the holder must:  (1) attend an orientation provided by the employing 
P18F2Ragency covering curriculum for the teaching assignment, classroom instruction, and classroom management; (2) obtain an       
P18F3Revaluation by a Commission-accredited professional preparation institution identifying the requirements he or she must       
P18F4Rcomplete to be eligible for the related credential; (3) complete EITHER (a) six semester units or nine quarter units of      
P18F5Rapproved course work in a Commission-accredited professional preparation program, or subject matter program, required for    
P18F6Rissuance of the related credential; OR (b) all components of the appropriate subject matter examination(s), provided the     
P18F7Rholder has not yet completed the subject matter competence requirement for the related credential; OR (c) a minimum of       
P18F8Rninety hours of professional development activities that are directly related to the subject or class authorized by the      
P18F9Remergency, provided the holder's employing agency has a Commission-approved Plan to Develop Fully Qualified Educators; (4)   
P18FARbe assigned to an experienced educator appointed by the employing agency to provide guidance and assistance; and (5) apply   
P18FBRfor reissuance through his or her employing agency.                                                                          
P18G1RTo renew this emergency permit, the holder must:  (1) complete at least six semester units or nine quarter units of approved 
P18G2Rcourse work in a Commission-accredited professional preparation program or subject matter program, as required for issuance  
P18G3Rof the related or prerequisite credential; (2) be assigned to an experienced educator appointed by the employing agency to   
P18G4Rprovide guidance and assistance; and (3) apply for reissuance through his or her employing agency.                           
P18H1RTo renew this teaching permit, the holder must maintain his or her valid non-emergency teaching credential, must complete a  
P18H2Rminimum of six semester hours of course work applicable toward the credential which authorizes this service, and must apply  
P18H3Rthrough the employing agency.  In lieu of six semester hours of course work, the holder who verifies three years of previous 
P18H4Rteaching experience on a non-emergency credential may complete ninety hours of professional development activities directly  
P18H5Rrelated to the subject or class authorized by this permit.  Details about the content of those professional development      
P18H6Ractivities must accompany the application for renewal.                                                                       
P18I1RTo renew this initial issuance of an emergency permit, the holder must attend an orientation provided by the employing       
P18I2Ragency covering curriculum for the teaching assignment, classroom instruction, and classroom management.  In addition, the   
P18I3Rholder must complete the requirements listed.  However, approved employing agencies may offer the holder ninety clock hours  
P18I4Rof professional development activities in lieu of the six semester units of course work.                                     
P18J1RTo renew this initial issuance of the Emergency Teacher Librarian Services Permit, the holder must: (1) attend an            
P18J2Rorientation provided by the employing agency covering curriculum for the teaching assignment, classroom instruction, and     
P18J3Rclassroom management; (2) obtain an evaluation by a Commission-accredited professional preparation institution identifying   
P18J4Rthe requirements he or she must complete to be eligible for the related credential; (3) complete EITHER (a) six semester     
P18J5Runits or nine quarter units of approved course work in a Commission-accredited professional preparation program that was     
P18J6Rrequired for issuance of the related or prerequisite credential, or (b) a minimum of ninety hours of professional            
P18J7Rdevelopment activities that are directly related to the subject or class authorized by this emergency provided, the holder's 
P18J8Remploying agency has a Commission-approved Plan to Develop Fully Qualified Educators; (4) be assigned an experienced         
P18J9Reducator by the employing agency that will provide guidance and assistance; and (5) maintain his or her valid prerequisite   
P18JARcredential (if applicable); and (6) apply for reissuance through his or her employing agency.                                
P18K1RTo renew this emergency permit, the holder must: (1) complete six semester units or nine quarter units of approved course    
P18K2Rwork in a Commission-accredited professional preparation program that was required for issuance of the related or            
P18K3Rprerequisite credential; (2) be assigned an experienced educator by the employing agency who will provide guidance and       
P18K4Rassistance; and (3) apply for reissuance through his or her employing agency.                                                
P18L1RTo renew this emergency permit, the holder must verify admission to a college or university that has a Commission-approved   
P18L2Rprogram for the credential which authorizes this service; must complete a minimum of six semester hours of course work       
P18L3Rapproved by the college or university as applicable toward that credential; and must apply for renewal through the employing 
P18L4Ragency.  The employing agency must verify that the holder has been provided with an experienced educator to guide and assist 
P18L5Rthe holder throughout the term of this permit.                                                                               
P18M1RTo renew this initial issuance of an emergency permit, the holder must: (1) attend an orientation provided by the employing  
P18M2Ragency covering curriculum for the teaching assignment, classroom instruction, and classroom management; (2) complete EITHER 
P18M3R(a) six semester units or nine quarter units of course work toward fulfillment of the #E;#N;#S;#L;#U requirements; or (b)    
P18M4Rall components of the appropriate subject matter examination(s), provided the holder has not yet completed the subject       
P18M5Rmatter competence requirement for the related credential; OR (c) a minimum of ninety hours of professional development       
P18M6Ractivities that are directly related to the subject or class authorized by the emergency, provided the holder's employing    
P18M7Ragency has a Commission-approved Plan to Develop Fully Qualified Educators; (3) be assigned to an experienced educator       
P18M8Rappointed by the employing agency to provide guidance and assistance; and (4) apply for reissuance through his or her        
P18M9Remploying agency.                                                                                                            
P18N1RTo renew this emergency permit, the holder must complete a minimum of six semester hours of course work toward fulfillment   
P18N2Rof the following requirements for the Preliminary Level I Credential:#E;#N;#S;#L;#I;#U.  The holder must apply for renewal   
P18N3Rthrough the employing agency.  The employing agency must verify that the holder has been provided with an experienced        
P18N4Reducator to guide and assist the holder throughout the term of this permit.                                                  
P18O1RThe term of this permit is limited to the time established on the holders first issuance of a California teaching credential 
P18O2Rbased on an out-of-state teacher preparation program.  As stated on that document, the holder must satisfy the Basic Skills  
P18O3RRequirement within one year of the issuance date of that document in order to be eligible to continue teaching.  Upon        
P18O4Rsatisfying this requirement the holder, through the employing agency, may apply for an extension of this permit for the      
P18O5Rremainder of the full calendar year as provided in regulation.                                                               
P18P1RTo renew this emergency permit, the holder must verify admission to a college or university that has a Commission-approved   
P18P2Rprogram for the teaching credential which is a prerequisite for the professional clear specialist credential; must complete  
P18P3Ra minimum of six semester hours of course work approved by the college or university as applicable toward that credential;   
P18P4Rand must apply for renewal through the employing agency.  The employing agency must verify that the holder has been provided 
P18P5Rwith an experienced educator to guide and assist the holder throughout the term of this permit.                              
P18Q1RTo renew this emergency permit, the holder must verify admission to a college or university that has a Commission-approved   
P18Q2Rprogram for the prerequisite Multiple or Single Subject Teaching Credential and must complete a minimum of six semester      
P18Q3Rhours of course work approved by the college or university as applicable toward that credential.  One time only, in lieu of  
P18Q4Rcourse work, the applicant may complete the assessment for the Resource Specialist Certificate through an agency that has a  
P18Q5RCommission-approved program.  The holder must apply for renewal of the permit through the employing agency, which must       
P18Q6Rverify that the holder has been provided with an experienced educator to guide and assist the holder throughout the term of  
P18Q7Rthis permit.                                                                                                                 
P18R1RTo renew this emergency permit, the holder must verify admission to a college or university that has a Commission-approved   
P18R2Rprogram for the Resource Specialist Certificate and complete a minimum of six semester hours of course work approved by that 
P18R3Rcollege or university as applicable toward the certificate.  In lieu of course work, the holder may complete the assessment  
P18R4Rfor the Resource Specialist Certificate through an agency that has a Commission-approved program.  The holder must apply for 
P18R5Rrenewal of the emergency permit through the employing agency, which must verify that the holder has been provided with an    
P18R6Rexperienced educator to guide and assist the holder throughout the term of this permit.  If the holder has completed the     
P18R7Rprogram or assessment, but has not taught for three years as required for the clear certificate, the emergency permit may be 
P18R8Rextended for an additional year to complete the experience requirement.                                                      
P18S1RTo renew this emergency permit, the holder must verify admission to a college or university that has a Commission-approved   
P18S2Rprogram for the specialist credential which authorizes this service; must complete a minimum of six semester hours of course 
P18S3Rwork approved by the college or university as applicable toward that credential; and must apply for renewal through the      
P18S4Remploying agency.  The employing agency must verify that the holder has been provided with an experienced educator to guide  
P18S5Rand assist the holder throughout the term of this permit.                                                                    
P18T1RTo renew this emergency permit, the holder must verify admission to a college or university that has a Commission-approved   
P18T2Rprogram for the specialist instruction credential which is a prerequisite for the Resource Specialist Certificate; must      
P18T3Rcomplete a minimum of six semester hours of coursework approved by the college or university as applicable toward that       
P18T4Rcredential; and must apply for renewal through the employing agency.  The employing agency must verify that the holder has   
P18T5Rbeen provided with an experienced educator to guide and assist the holder throughout the term of this permit.                
P18U1RTo renew this initial issuance of the Emergency Clinical or Rehabilitative Services Permit, the holder must: (1) attend an   
P18U2Rorientation provided by the employing agency covering curriculum for the assignment, classroom instruction, and classroom    
P18U3Rmanagement; (2) obtain an evaluation by a Commission-accredited professional preparation institution identifying the         
P18U4Rrequirements he or she must complete to be eligible for the related credential; (3) complete EITHER (a) six semester units   
P18U5Ror nine quarter units of approved course work in a Commission-accredited professional preparation program that are required  
P18U6Rfor the issuance of the Clinical or Rehabilitative Services Credential; or (b) a minimum of ninety hours of professional     
P18U7Rdevelopment activities that are directly related to the subject or class authorized by this emergency, provided the holder's 
P18U8Remploying agency has a Commission-approved Plan to Develop Fully Qualified Educators; (4) be assigned an experienced         
P18U9Reducator by the employing agency who will provide guidance and assistance; and (5) apply for reissuance through his or her   
P18UARemploying agency.                                                                                                            
P18V1RTo renew this emergency permit, the holder must: (1) complete six semester units or nine quarter units of approved course    
P18V2Rwork in a Commission-accredited professional preparation program that are required for issuance of the Clinical or           
P18V3RRehabilitative Services Credential, (2) Be assigned to an experienced educator appointed by the employing agency to provide  
P18V4Rguidance and assistance; and (3) apply for reissuance through his or her employing agency.                                   
P18W1RThe term of this permit is an extension of time for the full calendar year as provided in regulation.                        
P18X1RThe term of this emergency permit is limited by the term of the prerequisite credential.  To receive an extension of this    
P18X2Rpermit for the remainder of the emergency period to June 30 or January 31 as provided in regulation, the holder must renew   
P18X3Rthe prerequisite credential and must apply for the extension of this permit through the employing agency.  The renewal       
P18X4Rrequirements listed must be completed before this permit will be renewed following the June 30 or January 31 expiration      
P18Y1RThe term of this emergency permit is limited by the term of the prerequisite credential.  To receive an extension of this    
P18Y2Rpermit for the remainder of the full calendar year as provided in regulation, the holder must renew the prerequisite         
P18Y3Rcredential and must apply for the extension of this permit through the employing agency.  The renewal requirements listed    
P18Y4Rmust be completed before this permit will be renewed following the full calendar year expiration date.                       
P18Z1RThe term of this teaching permit is limited by the term of the prerequisite credential.  To receive an extension of this     
P18Z2Rpermit for the remainder of the full calendar year as provided in regulations, the holder must renew the prerequisite        
P18Z3Rcredential and apply for the extension of this permit through the employing agency.  The renewal requirements listed must be 
P18Z4Rcompleted before this permit will be renewed following the full calendar year expiration date.                               
P19H1RTo renew this teaching permit the holder must:  (1) maintain an appropriate valid prerequisite teaching credential; (2)      
P19H2REITHER (a)complete a minimum of six semester units of coursework applicable toward the credential which authorizes this      
P19H3Rservice; OR (b)take all examinations appropriate to the type of permit requested that have not already been passed, and pass 
P19H4Rtwo sections; and (3)apply through the employing agency.                                                                     
P19O1 This code does not exist in CAS.                                                                                             
P19S1RTo renew this teaching permit, the holder must:  maintain an appropriate valid prerequisite credential; complete a minimum   
P19S2Rof six semester units of coursework appropriate to each special education specialty area which authorizes this service; and  
P19S3Rapply through the employing agency.                                                                                          
P1FF1RTo renew this initial issuance of an emergency permit, the holder must: (1) attend an orientation provided by the employing  
P1FF2Ragency covering curriculum for the teaching assignment, classroom instruction, and classroom management; (2) obtain an       
P1FF3Revaluation by a Commission-accredited professional preparation institution identifying the requirements he or she must       
P1FF4Rcomplete to be eligible for the related credential; (3) complete EITHER (a) six semester units or nine quarter units of      
P1FF5Rapproved course work in a Commission-accredited professional preparation program, or subject matter program, required for    
P1FF6Rissuance of the related credential; OR (b) components of the appropriate subject matter examination(s), provided the holder  
P1FF7Rhas not yet completed the subject matter competence requirement for the related credential; (4) be assigned to an            
P1FF8Rexperienced educator appointed by the employing agency to provide guidance and assistance; and (5) apply for reissuance      
P1FF9Rthrough his or her employing agency.                                                                                         
P30 1RTo renew this permit, the holder needs to submit an application and fee through his or her employing school district or      
P30 2Rcounty office of education, or directly to the Commission.                                                                   
P3011RTo receive a reissuance of this permit for a second year, the holder needs to submit an application and fee through his      
P3012Remploying school district or county office of education, or directly to the Commission.                                      
P3021RTo receive a reissuance of this permit for a third year, the holder needs to submit an application and fee through his or    
P3022Rher employing school district or county office of education, or directly to the Commission.                                  
P3031RTo receive a reissuance of this permit for an additional year, the holder must submit an application and fee through his or  
P3032Rher employing school district or county office of education, or directly to the Commission.                                  
P60 1RTo renew this permit, the holder must submit an application form and fee through his or her employing school district or     
P60 2Rcounty office of education.  The application must include a statement of endorsement from the superintendent and             
P60 3Rverification that the staff development activities offered to the district's or county's regular teaching staff were made    
P60 4Ravailable to the permit holder.                                                                                              
P90F1RThis permit may not be renewed.  To continue to serve as a substitute teacher, the holder must receive a bachelor's or       
P90F2Rhigher degree from a regionally accredited college or university and apply for an Emergency 30-Day Substitute Teaching       
P90F3RPermit or another appropriate teaching permit or credential.                                                                 
P90I1RTo renew this permit, the holder must verify the completion of fifteen semester units of course work from a regionally       
P90I2Raccredited four-year California college or university completed since this permit was issued; must verify continued          
P90I3Renrollment in a regionally accredited four-year California college or university; and must submit an application form and    
P90I4Rfee through his or her employing school district or county office of education, or directly to the Commission.               
PID 1RThis certificate may not be renewed.                                                                                         
PIDD1 This certificate may not be renewed.                                                                                         
PII 1RDuring the valid period of this certificate, the holder must participate in the pre-intern program and take the              
PII 2Rsubject-matter examination(s) appropriate to the credential that authorizes the service listed.  This certificate may be     
PII 3Rrenewed for an additional year at the request of the employer if the holder takes the subject-matter examination and does    
PII 4Rnot pass, but continues to participate successfully in the pre-intern program.                                               
PIPF1RThis certificate may not be renewed.                                                                                         
PIPI1RDuring the valid period of this permit, the holder must take all subject-matter examination(s) appropriate to the credential 
PIPI2Rthat authorizes the service listed.  The employing agency may request a one-time only renewal of this permit if the holder   
PIPI3Rtook, but did not pass, all of the appropriate subject-matter examination(s).                                                
PIR 1RThis certificate may not be renewed.                                                                                         
PIT 1RThis certificate may not be renewed.                                                                                         
PIX 1RThis certificate may not be renewed.                                                                                         
PLA11RThis is the holder's initial Limited Assignment Emergency Teaching Permit for this assignment.  This permit may be reissued  
PLA12Rfor two additional one-year periods provided the holder meets the requirements listed.                                       
PLA21RThis is the holder's second Limited Assignment Emergency Teaching Permit for this assignment.  This permit may be reissued   
PLA22Rfor one additional one-year period provided the holder meets the requirements listed.                                        
PLA31RThis is the holder's final Limited Assignment Emergency Teaching Permit for this assignment.  This permit may not be         
PLA32Rreissued .                                                                                                                   
PLA41RThis is the holder's initial Limited Assignment Emergency Teaching Permit for this assignment reissued under Title 5 Section 
PLA42R80027, effective 9/1/98.  This permit may be reissued for two additional one-year periods provided the holder meets the      
PLA43Rrequirements listed.                                                                                                         
PLB11RThis is the holder's initial Limited Assignment Teaching Permit for this assignment.  This permit may be reissued for two    
PLB12Radditional one-year periods provided the holder meets the requirements listed.                                               
PLB21RThis is the holder's second Limited Assignment Teaching Permit for this assignment.  This permit may be reissued for one     
PLB22Radditional one-year period provided the holder meets the requirements listed.                                                
PLB31RThis is the holder's final Limited Assignment Teaching Permit for this assignment.  This permit may not be reissued.         
PLB41RThis is the holder's initial Limited Assignment Teaching Permit for this assignment reissued under Title 5 Section 80027,    
PLB42Reffective 09/01/98.  This permit may be reissued for two additional one-year periods provided the holder meets the           
PLB43Rrequirements listed.                                                                                                         
PRO 1RThe holder must satisfy the professional level requirement by completing a Commission-approved Induction Program.            
R11 1 Contact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
R11O1RThis credential may not be renewed.  However, the holder will qualify for at least the first step credential of this type if 
R11O2Rhe or she satisfies the Basic Skills Requirement.                                                                            
R11Z1RWithin the first year of the issuance date of this document, the holder must satisfy the Basic Skills Requirement.  Failure  
R11Z2Rto satisfy the Basic Skills Requirement will result in inactivation of this document.  The holder and employer will be       
R11Z3Rnotified approximately one month prior to inactivation if the test results are not automatically provided to the Commission  
R11Z4Rby the testing agency.                                                                                                       
R12 1RTo renew this preliminary credential for the remainder of the five-year preliminary time period provided by law, the holder  
R12 2Rmust complete the following requirements:#L;#I;#U;#E;#W.  Before the end of the five-year preliminary time period, the       
R12 3Rholder of this credential must also complete the following requirements:#F;#Y;#H;#M;#C.  When all requirements have been     
R12 4Rcompleted, the holder will be eligible for a clear credential.                                                               
R12A1RTo renew this credential, the holder must complete the following requirements:#R;#I;#U;#E.  Upon completion of these         
R12A2Rrequirements, the holder may appeal for an additional year to complete the following:#F;#Y;#A;#H;#M;#C.  When all            
R12A3Rrequirements have been completed, the holder will be eligible for a clear credential.                                        
R12C1RTo renew this preliminary credential for the remainder of the five-year preliminary time period provided by law, the holder  
R12C2Rmust complete the following requirements and receive a formal recommendation from the college or university:#R;#I;#U;#E;#W.  
R12C3RBefore the end of the five-year preliminary time period, the holder of this credential must also complete the following      
R12C4Rrequirements:#F;#H;#M;#C.  When all requirements have been completed, the holder will be eligible for a clear credential.    
R12D1RTo renew this credential the holder must complete the following requirements:#L;#U;#E;#Y;#H;#M;#C.  When all requirements    
R12D2Rhave been completed, the holder will be eligible for a clear credential.                                                     
R12O1ROnce the holder qualifies for the first step credential, he or she will have two years during which to complete the          
R12O2Rfollowing requirements:#R;#I;#U;#E;#W.  The credential may then be renewed for the remainder of the five-year preliminary    
R12O3Rtime period provided by law.  Before the end of the five-year preliminary time period, the holder must also complete the     
R12O4Rfollowing requirements:#F;#Y;#H;#M;#C.  When all requirements have been completed, the holder will be eligible for a clear   
R12O5Rcredential.                                                                                                                  
R12P1RThe holder will be eligible for a clear credential upon completion of the requirements explained in the renewal statement.   
R12U1RThis one-year preliminary credential may be renewed for the remainder of the five-year preliminary time period provided by   
R12U2Rlaw upon the completion of either a two-semester hour course or an examination covering the provisions and principles of the 
R12U3RU.S. Constitution.  Before the end of the five-year preliminary time period, the holder of this credential must also receive 
R12U4Ra recommendation from an approved Local Education Agency and must complete the following requirements: a minimum of two      
R12U5Ryears of successful full-time teaching experience as authorized by this credential, nine semester units or 135 clock hours   
R12U6Rin an approved program of personalized preparation, and the health education unit.                                           
R12W1RTo renew this one-year credential, the holder needs to submit only an application and fee to the Commission prior to the     
R12W2Rexpiration date.  The renewed credential will be valid for two years.  Before the end of that two-year period the holder     
R12W3Rmust complete the following requirements:#R;#I;#U;#E.  The credential may then be renewed for the remainder of the five-year 
R12W4Rpreliminary time period provided by law.  Before the end of the five-year preliminary time period, the holder must also      
R12W5Rcomplete the following requirements:#F;#Y;#H;#M;#C.  When all requirements have been completed, the holder will be eligible  
R12W6Rfor the clear credential.                                                                                                    
R12Z1RBefore the end of four years following the issuance date of this document, the holder must verify that he or she has         
R12Z2Rcompleted the following requirements:#R;#U;#E.  The holder must submit verification of completion of these requirements to   
R12Z3Rthe Commission.  Failure to verify completion of the above requirements will result in inactivation of this document.  The   
R12Z4Rholder and the employer will be notified during the fourth year if verification has not been received.  Before the end of    
R12Z5Rthe five-year preliminary time period, the holder must also complete the following requirements:#F;#Y;#H;#M;#C.  When all    
R12Z6Rrequirements have been completed, the holder will be eligible for the clear credential.                                      
R13 1 Contact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
R13A1RTo renew this credential, the holder must verify the completion of a minimum of two years of successful teaching experience  
R13A2Ras authorized by this credential since the date the preliminary credential was initially issued.                             
R13F1RTo renew this credential, the holder must receive a recommendation from an approved Local Education Agency and must complete 
R13F2Rthe following requirements:  a mininum of two years of successful full-time teaching experience as authorized by this        
R13F3Rcredential, nine semester units or 135 clock hours in an approved program of personalized preparation, and the health        
R13F4Reducation unit.                                                                                                              
R13O1ROnce the holder qualifies for the first step credential, he or she will have five years during which to receive a            
R13O2Rrecommendation from an approved Local Education Agency and complete the following requirements: a minimum of two years of    
R13O3Rsuccessful full-time teaching experience as authorized by this credential, nine semester units or 135 clock hours in an      
R13O4Rapproved program of personalized preparation, and the health education unit.                                                 
R13P1RTo renew this credential, the holder must receive a recommendation from an approved Local Education Agency and must complete 
R13P2Rthe following requirements: a minimum of two years of successful part-time teaching experience as authorized by this         
R13P3Rcredential and four semester units, or 60 clock hours in an approved program of personalized preparation.                    
R14 1RTo renew this credential, the holder must complete the following requirements:#F;#Y;#H;#M;#C.  When all requirements have    
R14 2Rbeen completed, the holder will be eligible for the clear credential.                                                        
R14C1RTo renew this credential, the holder must complete the requirements specified by her or his California college or university 
R14C2Rand must receive a formal recommendation from that college or university.  When all requirements have been completed, the    
R14C3Rholder will be eligible for a clear credential.                                                                              
R14D1RTo renew this credential the holder may be required to complete one or all of the following: developing English Language     
R14D2RSkills, including Reading; provisions and principles of the U.S. Constitution; subject matter competence.  In addition, the  
R14D3Rholder must complete all of the requirements listed in one of the following options: (1) a Commission-approved Induction     
R14D4RProgram including a formal recommendation from the program sponsor and a valid CPR card (Infant, Child and Adult class); or  
R14D5R(2) a California Beginning Teacher Support and Assessment (BTSA), and health education and special education, and            
R14D6Rappropriate computer-based technology; or (3) fifth year of study including a formal recommendation from the college or      
R14D7Runiversity, and health education, and special education, and appropriate computer-based technology.                          
R14I1RThis credential may not be renewed.  To qualify for the clear credential, the holder of this document must complete a        
R14I2RCommission-approved Induction program including Verification of Completion by the program sponsor.                           
R14O1ROnce the holder qualifies for the first step credential, he or she will have five years during which to complete the         
R14O2Rfollowing requirements:#F;#Y;#H;#M;#C.  When all requirements have been completed, the holder will be eligible for a clear   
R14O3Rcredential.                                                                                                                  
R14R1RTo renew this credential the holder must complete all of the requirements listed in one of the following options: (1) a      
R14R2RCommission-accredited Induction Program and a valid CPR card (Infant, Child and Adult class); or (2) a California Beginning  
R14R3RTeacher Support and Assessment (BTSA), and health education, and special education, and computer education or basic          
R14R4Rcompetency in the use of computers in the classroom, and advanced computer-based technology in educational settings; or (3)  
R14R5Rfifth year of study including a formal recommendation from the college or university, and health education, and special      
R14R6Reducation, and computer education or basic competency in the use of computers in the classroom, and advanced computer-based  
R14R7Rtechnology in educational settings.                                                                                          
R14S1RTo renew this document the holder must complete one of the following options: (1) a Commission-approved Induction Program    
R14S2Rincluding Verification of Completion from the program sponsor; or (2) a Beginning Teacher Support and Assessment (BTSA)      
R14S3RProgram and Commission-approved advanced study of health education, special populations, computer-based technology, and      
R14S4Rafter 07/01/2005 teaching English Learners; or (3) a Fifth Year of Study including a formal recommendation from the college  
R14S5Ror university, and Commission-approved advanced study of health education, special populations, computer-based technology,   
R14S6Rand after 07/01/2005 teaching English learners.                                                                              
R14T1RThe following requirements are needed to renew this credential and complete an option as                                     
R14T2Rdescribed:#L;#U;#E;#D;#P;#Z;#B;#H;#M;#C;#1;#2;#3;#F;#X;#Q.                                                                   
R14W1RTo renew this one-year credential, the holder needs to submit only an application and fee to the Commission prior to the     
R14W2Rexpiration date.  The renewed credential will be valid for five years.  Before the end of that five year period the holder   
R14W3Rmust complete the following requirements:#F;#Y;#H;#M;#C.  When all requirements have been completed, the holder will be      
R14W4Religible for a clear credential.                                                                                             
R15 1RThere are no additional requirements for the renewal of this credential; however, the term of this credential is limited by  
R15 2Rthe term of the prerequisite credential.  To renew this credential, the holder must also renew the prerequisite credential.  
R15E1RThis is the holder's initial Emergency Specialist Teaching Permit in Early Childhood Education.  To renew this permit, the   
R15E2Rholder must verify all renewal requirements as outlined on form CL-908. The application for renewal must be submitted by the 
R15E3RLocal Employing Agency.                                                                                                      
R15F1RThis is the final issuance of the permit and may not be renewed.                                                             
R15P1RThe term of this credential is limited by the term of the prerequisite credential.  To renew this credential, the holder     
R15P2Rmust also renew the prerequisite credential.                                                                                 
R16 1RThis credential may be renewed for one-year periods upon the request of the governing board of the employing school district 
R16 2Rand at the discretion of the Commission.                                                                                     
R16C1RThis credential may be renewed with an application and fee and a written statement of support from the governing board of    
R16C2Rthe employing school district that was adopted in a public meeting.  At that time, the holder will be eligible for a clear   
R16C3Rcredential.                                                                                                                  
R16P1RThis credential may be renewed for the remainder of the five-year preliminary time period allowed by law with an application 
R16P2Rand fee and a written statement of support from the governing board of the employing school district that was adopted in a   
R16P3Rpublic meeting.                                                                                                              
R17 1RThis internship credential may not be renewed.  To continue to serve in a position authorized by this credential, the holder 
R17 2Rmust receive a formal recommendation from the supervising college or university for the preliminary or clear credential      
R17 3Rwhich authorizes this service.                                                                                               
R1711RThis internship credential may not be renewed.  To continue to serve in a position authorized by this credential, the holder 
R1712Rmust receive a formal recommendation from the supervising college or university for the Preliminary Level I Credential which 
R1713Rauthorizes this service, and must submit a "Verification of Employment as a Special Educator" including information about    
R1714Rhis or her individualized preparation program plan to be developed collaboratively with the college or university and the    
R1715Remployer.                                                                                                                    
R1721RThis internship credential may not be renewed.  To continue to serve in a position authorized by this credential, the holder 
R1722Rmust receive a formal recommendation from the supervising college or university for the Clear Level II Credential which      
R1723Rauthorizes this service.                                                                                                     
R17B1RTo renew this credential for the remainder of the two-year internship period allowed by law, the holder must complete the    
R17B2Rrequirement covering the provisions and principles of the U.S. Constitution, verify subject-matter competence, continue to   
R17B3Rparticipate in the internship program, and apply through the supervising college or university.                              
R17E1RTo renew this credential for the remainder of the two-year internship period allowed by law, the holder must verify          
R17E2Rsubject-matter competence, continue to participate in the internship program, and apply through the supervising college or   
R17E3Runiversity.                                                                                                                  
R17N1RThis intern credential may not be renewed. To continue to serve in a position authorized by this credential, the holder must 
R17N2Robtain the recommendation from a Commission-approved Preliminary Education Specialist Credential program sponsor.            
R17P1RThe term of this internship credential is limited by the term of the prerequisite credential.  To renew this credential to   
R17P2Rthe full two-year internship period allowed by law, the holder must renew the prerequisite credential, continue to           
R17P3Rparticipate in the internship program, and apply through the supervising college or university.                              
R17U1RTo renew this credential for the remainder of the two-year internship period allowed by law, the holder must complete the    
R17U2Rrequirement covering the provisions and principles of the U.S. Constitution, continue to participate in the internship       
R17U3Rprogram, and apply through the supervising college or university.                                                            
R18A1RTo renew this emergency credential, the holder must complete a minimum of six semester hours of course work or ninety clock  
R18A2Rhours of approved staff development, applicable toward the preliminary or clear credential which authorizes this service,    
R18A3Rand must apply through the employing district, county, or agency.                                                            
R18B1RTo renew this emergency credential, the holder must seek admission to a college or university that has a Commission-approved 
R18B2Rprogram for both the clear specialist credential which authorizes this service and the teaching credential which is a        
R18B3Rprerequisite; must complete a minimum of six semester hours of coursework approved by the college or university as           
R18B4Rapplicable toward those credentials; and must apply through the employing district, county, or agency.                       
R18H1RThe holder will be eligible for the preliminary specialist credential upon completion of the requirements explained in the   
R18H2Rstatement above.  He or she will have five years during which to complete the requirements for the prerequisite Multiple or  
R18H3RSingle Subject Teaching Credential, including the student teaching requirement.                                              
R18L1RTo renew this emergency credential, the holder must seek admission to a college or university that has a Commission-approved 
R18L2Rprogram for the preliminary or clear credential which authorizes this service; must complete a minimum of six semester hours 
R18L3Rof course work approved by the college or university as applicable toward that credential; and must apply through the        
R18L4Remploying district, county, or agency.                                                                                       
R18N1RThe holder will be eligible for an emergency specialist credential upon completion of the requirements explained in the      
R18N2Rstatement above.  He or she must contact a college or university for an evaluation for both the clear specialist credential  
R18N3Rwhich authorizes this service and the teaching credential which is a prerequisite, and must apply through the employing      
R18N4Rdistrict, county, or agency.                                                                                                 
R18O1RThe holder will be eligible for an emergency specialist credential upon completion of the requirements explained in the      
R18O2Rstatement.  He or she must contact a college or university for an evaluation for the prerequisite teaching credential which  
R18O3RCalifornia requires for all specialists and must apply through the employing district, county, or agency.                    
R18P1RTo renew this emergency credential, the holder must seek admission to a college or university that has a Commission-approved 
R18P2Rprogram for the teaching credential which is a prerequisite for the clear specialist credential, must complete a minimum of  
R18P3Rsix semester hours of course work approved by the college  or university as applicable toward that credential, and must      
R18P4Rapply through the employing district, county, or agency.                                                                     
R18Q1RThe holder will be eligible for the preliminary specialist credential upon completion of the requirements explained in the   
R18Q2Rstatement.  To qualify for the clear credential, the holder must apply for the prerequisite Multiple or Single Subject       
R18Q3RTeaching Credential.                                                                                                         
R18S1RTo renew this emergency credential, the holder must seek admission to a college or university that has a Commission-approved 
R18S2Rprogram for the clear specialist credential which authorizes this service, must complete a minimum of six semester hours of  
R18S3Rcourse work approved by the college or university as applicable toward that credential, and must apply through the employing 
R18S4Rdistrict, county, or agency.                                                                                                 
R18X1RThe term of this emergency credential is limited by the term of the prerequisite credential.   To receive an extension of    
R18X2Rthis credential for the remainder of the emergency period to June 30 or January 31 as provided in regulation, the holder     
R18X3Rmust renew the prerequisite credential and must apply for the extension of this credential through the employing district,   
R18X4Rcounty, or agency.  The renewal requirements listed above must be completed before the credential will be renewed following  
R18X5Rthat June 30 or January 31 expiration date.                                                                                  
R18Y1RThe holder will be eligible for an emergency specialist credential upon completion of the requirements explained in the      
R18Y2Rstatement.  He or she must contact a college or university for an evaluation for the clear specialist credential which       
R18Y3Rauthorizes this service and must apply through the employing district, county, or agency.                                    
R19 1RContact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
R1921RTo renew this credential for the remainder of the five-year preliminary time period, the holder must complete the following  
R1922Rrequirement(s):#E;#N;#S;#L;#I;#U.  To qualify for the Clear Level II Credential, before the end of the five-year preliminary 
R1923Rtime period provided by law, the holder must do the following: (1) complete two years of successful experience in a          
R1924Rfull-time position providing direct instruction to special education students, in a public school, or private school of      
R1925Requivalent status, while holding this preliminary credential, and (2) obtain the recommendation of a college or university   
R1926Rwith a Level II education specialist program accredited by the Commission's Committee on Accreditation verifying the         
R1927Rcompletion of an individualized program of advanced preparation designed by the holder in cooperation with the employing     
R1928Ragency and the college or university.  In addition, the holder must verify completion of the requirements for health         
R1929Reducation and computer education.                                                                                            
R19A1RTo renew this credential, the holder must complete the following requirement(s):#F;#H;#M;#C.  When all requirements have     
R19A2Rbeen completed, the holder will be eligible for a clear credential.                                                          
R19B1RThe holder will be eligible for a two-year Preliminary Level I Education Specialist Instruction Credential upon completion   
R19B2Rof the requirement explained above.  The credential may then be renewed for the remainder of the five-year preliminary time  
R19B3Rperiod provided by law, upon completion of the following requirements(s):#E;#N;#S;#L;#I;#U.  To qualify for the Clear Level  
R19B4RII Credential, before the end of the five-year preliminary time period allowed by law, the holder must (1) complete two      
R19B5Ryears of successful experience in a full-time position providing direct instruction to special education students, in a      
R19B6Rpublic school, or private school of equivalent status, while holding this preliminary credential, and (2) obtain the         
R19B7Rrecommendation of a college or university with a Level II education specialist program accredited by the Commission's        
R19B8RCommittee on Accreditation verifying the completion of an individualized program of advanced preparation designed by the     
R19B9Rholder in cooperation with the employing agency and the college or university.  In addition, the holder must verify          
R19BARcompletion of the requirements for health education and computer education.                                                  
R19C1 The holder will be eligible for a two-year Preliminary Level I Education specialist Instruction Credential upon (1)          
R19C2 submitting verification of employment in an appropriate position on a form provided by the Commission and (2) completion of  
R19C3 the requirement explained above.  The credential may then be renewed for the remainder of the five-year preliminary time     
R19C4 period provided by law, upon completion of the following requirements(s):#E;#N;#S;#L;#I;#U.  To qualify for the Clear Level  
R19C5 II Credential, before the end of the five year preliminary time period allowed by law, the holder must do the following      
R19D1RThe holder will be eligible for a Clear Level II Education Specialist Instruction Credential upon completion of the          
R19D2Rfollowing requirement(s):#E;#N;#S;#L;#U;#H;#C.  In addition, the holder must complete an accredited program for the Clear    
R19D3RLevel II credential.  The program requires the holder to do the following: (1) complete two years of successful experience   
R19D4Rin a full-time position providing direct instruction to special education students, in a public school, or private school of 
R19D5Requivalent status, while holding this preliminary credential, and (2) obtain the recommendation of a college or university   
R19D6Rwith a Level II education specialist program accredited by the Commission's Committee on Accreditation verifying the         
R19D7Rcompletion of an individualized program of advanced preparation designed by the holder in cooperation with the employing     
R19D8Ragency and the college or university.                                                                                        
R19E1RThe holder will be eligible for an Emergency Education Specialist Instruction Permit upon completion of the requirements     
R19E2Rexplained above.  He or she must apply for the permit through the employing disrict, county, or agency.  To qualify for the  
R19E3RPreliminary Level I Education Specialist Credential which authorizes this service, the holder will need to complete the      
R19E4Rfollowing requirements:#E;#N;#S;#L;#I;#U.  In addition, when applying for the Preliminary Level I Credential the holder will 
R19E5Rneed to submit a "Verification of Employment as a Special Educator" including information about his or her individualized    
R19E6Rpreparation program plan to be developed collaboratively with the college or university and the employer.                    
R19F1RTo renew this credential the holder must complete an accredited program for the Clear Level II credential.  The program      
R19F2Rrequires the holder to do the following: (1) complete two years of successful experience in a full-time position providing   
R19F3Rdirect instruction to special education students, in a public school, or private school of equivalent status, while holding  
R19F4Rthis preliminary credential, and (2) obtain the recommendation of a college or university with a Level II education          
R19F5Rspecialist program accredited by the Commission's Committee on Accreditation verifying the completion of an individualized   
R19F6Rprogram of advanced preparation designed by the holder in cooperation with the employing agency and the college or           
R19F7Runiversity.                                                                                                                  
R19G1RThe holder will be eligible for an Emergency Education Specialist Instruction Permit upon completion of the requirements     
R19G2Rexplained in the statement above.  He or she must contact a college or university for an evaluation for the Preliminary      
R19G3RLevel I Education Specialist Credential which authorizes this service and must apply for the emergency permit through the    
R19G4Remploying school district, county, or agency.                                                                                
R19H1RTo obtain the Clear Level II credential, the holder must complete an accredited categorical program in the disability area   
R19H2Rlisted on this document.  In addition, the holder must (1) complete two years of successful experience in a full-time        
R19H3Rposition providing direct instruction to special education students, in a public school, or private school of equivalent     
R19H4Rstatus, while holding this preliminary credential, and (2) obtain the recommendation of a college or university with a Level 
R19H5RII education specialist program accredited by the Commission's Committee on Accreditation verifying the completion of an     
R19H6Rindividualized program of advanced preparation designed by the holder in cooperation with the employing agency and the       
R19H7Rcollege or university.                                                                                                       
R19J1RTo obtain the Clear Level II Credential, the holder must verify the completion of a Commission-accredited program in the     
R19J2Rdisability area listed on this document and the following requirement(s):#E;#N;#S;#L;#U;#H;#C.  In addition, the holder must 
R19J3R(1) complete two years of successful experience in a full-time position providing direct instruction to special education    
R19J4Rstudents, in a public school, or private school of equivalent status, while holding this preliminary credential, and (2)     
R19J5Robtain the recommendation of a Commission-accredited college or university with a Level II education specialist program      
R19J6Rverifying the completion of a categorical program, specific requirements listed, and an individualized program of advanced   
R19J7Rpreparation designed by the holder in cooperation with the employing agency and the college or university.                   
R19L1RThis Preliminary Level I Credential may not be renewed.  To qualify for the Clear Level II Credential the holder must do the 
R19L2Rfollowing:  (1) complete two years of successful experience in a full-time position providing direct instruction to special  
R19L3Reducation students in a public school, or private school of equivalent status, while holding this preliminary credential,    
R19L4Rand (2) obtain the recommendation of an approved agency with a Level II education specialist program accredited by the       
R19L5RCommission's Committee on Accreditation verifying the completion of an individualized program of advanced preparation        
R19L6Rdesigned by the holder in cooperation with the employing agency and the recommending agency.  In addition, the holder must   
R19L7Rverify completion of the requirements for health education and computer education.                                           
R19M1RThis credential may not be renewed. To qualify for the next level, the holder must EITHER: (1) complete a                    
R19M2RCommission-approved Level II Education Specialist Credential program, including health education and computer education, two 
R19M3Ryears of full-time successful teaching experience providing instruction to students with special needs, and obtain the       
R19M4Rrecommendation from a Commission-approved Level II Education Specialist Credential program sponsor; OR (2) obtain the        
R19M5Rrecommendation from a Commission-approved Clear Education Specialist Credential Induction program sponsor.                   
R19N1RThis preliminary credential may not be renewed. To continue to serve in a position authorized by this credential, the holder 
R19N2Rmust obtain the recommendation from a Commission-approved Clear Education Specialist Credential Induction program sponsor.   
R19O1RThe holder will be eligible for a Preliminary Level I Education Specialist Instruction Credential upon completion of the     
R19O2Rrequirements explained in the statement above.  He or she must apply for the credential through the employing district,      
R19O3Rcounty, or agency and submit a "Verification of Employment as a Special Educator" including information about his or her     
R19O4Rindividualized preparation program plan to be developed collaboratively with the college or university and the employer.     
R19P1RThis preliminary credential may not be renewed.  To qualify for the clear credential, the holder must complete the           
R19P2Rrequirements for the prerequisite Multiple or Single Subject Teaching Credential, including the student teaching             
R19Q1RThis preliminary credential may not be renewed.  To qualify for the clear credential, the holder must apply for the          
R19Q2Rprerequisite Multiple or Single Subject Teaching Credential.                                                                 
R19T1RThis preliminary credential has been extended for one year by appeal.  It will not be extended again.  To qualify for the    
R19T2Rclear credential, the holder must either (1) complete the requirements for the prerequisite Multiple or Single Subject       
R19T3RTeaching Credential through a Commission-approved program at a California college or university, or (2) complete the         
R19T4Rrequirements for the preliminary (Level I) specialist credential under standards developed by the Commission.                
R19Z1RBefore the end of four years following the issuance date of this document, the holder must verify that he or she has         
R19Z2Rcompleted the following requirements:#E;#N;#S;#L;#U.  The holder must submit verification of completion of these             
R19Z3Rrequirements to the Commission.  Failure to verify completion of the above requirements will result in inactivation of this  
R19Z4Rdocument.  The holder and the employer will be notified during the fourth year if verification has not been received.        
R20 1RTo renew this credential, the holder needs to submit only an application and fee to the Commission no earlier than 12 months 
R20 2Rbefore the expiration date.  The renewal period is five years.                                                               
R20C1RTo renew this credential for an additional five years, the holder must complete the Commission's online renewal process      
R20C2Rwithin 6 months prior to the expiration date.                                                                                
R20N1RTo renew this School Nurse credential, the holder needs to submit an application and fee to the Commission prior to the      
R20N2Rexpiration date. The holder must also maintain a valid nursing license issued by California Board of Registered Nursing. The 
R20N3Rrenewal period is five years.                                                                                                
R20O1RThe holder will be eligible for a clear credential upon completion of the requirements explained in the statement above.     
R20P1RThe holder will be eligible for a clear specialist credential, plus the prerequisite teaching credential which California    
R20P2Rrequires for all specialists, upon completion of the requirements explained in the statement above.                          
R21 1RFor each five-year renewal of this credential, the holder must complete a minimum of 150 clock hours of planned and approved 
R21 2Rprofessional growth activities and one-half of one year of experience as specified in The California Professional Growth     
R21 3RManual.                                                                                                                      
R21C1RThe term of this credential is limited to the term established by the holder's prerequisite credential.                      
R21E1RThis is the holder's one-time two-year extension of his or her professional clear credential.  No further extensions will be 
R21E2Rissued for this credential.  Before a five-year clear credential will be issued, the holder must verify that 150 clock hours 
R21E3Rof planned and approved professional growth activities and one-half of one year of experience as specified in The California 
R21E4RProfessional Growth Manual have been completed since the last five-year clear credential was issued.                         
R21O1RThe holder will be eligible for a clear credential upon completion of the requirements explained in the statement above.     
R21P1RThe term of this credential is limited to the term established by the holder's prerequisite credential.                      
R21U1RFor each five-year renewal of this credential, the holder must complete a minimum of 150 clock hours of planned and approved 
R21U2Rprofessional growth activities and one-half of one year of experience as specified in The California Professional Growth     
R21U3RManual.  The holder has already used the one-time two-year extension available for this credential; the professional growth  
R21U4Rand service requirements must be completed before another clear credential can be issued.                                    
R22 1RThe term of this credential is limited to the term established by the holder's first professional clear credential.  During  
R22 2Rthis renewal period, the holder must complete only one set of professional growth and service requirements as specified in   
R22 3RThe California Professional Growth Manual to renew any or all of the professional clear credentials that he or she holds.    
R22E1RThe term of this one-time two-year credential extension is limited to the term established by the holder's first             
R22E2Rprofessional clear credential extension.  No further extensions will be issued for this credential.  Before a five-year      
R22E3Rprofessional clear credential will be issued, the holder must verify that 150 clock hours of planned and approved            
R22E4Rprofessional growth activities and one-half of one year of experience as specified in The California Professional Growth     
R22E5RManual have been completed since the last five-year professional clear credential was issued.  The holder must complete only 
R22E6Rone set of professional growth and service requirements to renew any or all of the professional clear credentials that he or 
R22E7Rshe holds.                                                                                                                   
R22U1RThe term of this credential is limited to the term established by the holder's first professional clear credential.  During  
R22U2Rthis renewal period, the holder must complete only one set of professional growth and service requirements as specified in   
R22U3RThe California Professional Growth Manual to renew any or all of the professional clear credentials that he or she holds.    
R22U4RThe holder has already used the one-time two-year extension available for this credential; the professional growth and       
R22U5Rservice requirements must be completed before another professional clear credential can be issued.                           
R23 1RThis credential need not be renewed.  The authorization shall remain in force for as long as the valid prerequisite teaching 
R23 2Rcredential is held concurrently.                                                                                             
R24 1RTo renew this credential, the holder must complete two years of successful experience in a special center and six semester   
R24 2Runits of collegiate course work related to special education or applicable toward a Multiple or Single Subject Teaching      
R24 3RCredential.                                                                                                                  
R25 1RThis credential may not be renewed.  To continue to serve in the position authorized by this credential, the holder must     
R25 2Rqualify for the preliminary or clear credential which authorizes this service.                                               
R25O1RThis one-year preliminary credential may be renewed for the remainder of the three-year preliminary period provided by law   
R25O2Rupon passage of the California Basic Educational Skills Test (CBEST).                                                        
R26F1RThis credential may not be renewed again.  To continue to serve in the position authorized by this credential, the holder    
R26F2Rmust qualify for the preliminary or clear credential which authorizes this service.                                          
R26I1RFor the first renewal of this credential, the holder must complete a minimum of twelve semester hours of course work         
R26I2Rapplicable toward the preliminary or clear credential which authorizes this service, must pass an assessment in the target   
R26I3Rlanguage, and must apply through the employing district, county, or agency.                                                  
R26O1RThe holder will be eligible for a two-year preliminary Sojourn Credential upon completion of the requirements explained      
R26O2Rabove.  He or she must apply through the employing district, county, or agency for that preliminary credential.              
R26R1RFor each additional one-year renewal of this credential, the holder must complete a minimum of six semester hours of course  
R26R2Rwork applicable toward the preliminary or clear credential which authorizes this service, and must apply through the         
R26R3Remploying district, county, or agency.                                                                                       
R27 1RThis certificate is not renewable.  To continue to serve in the position authorized by this certificate, the holder must     
R27 2Rcomplete the teacher trainee program and obtain the clear Single Subject Teaching Credential which authorizes this service.  
R28 1RThis certificate is not renewable.  To continue to serve in a position authorized by this certificate, the holder must       
R28 2Rcomplete the district intern program and obtain the clear credential.  A one calendar-year extension may be requested by the 
R28 3Remployer if the holder needs additional time to successfully complete the professional development plan and experience       
R28 4Rrequirements.                                                                                                                
R28F1RThis certificate is not renewable.  To continue to serve in a position authorized by this certificate, the holder must       
R28F2Rcomplete the district intern program and obtain the clear credential.                                                        
R29 1RThis certificate is not renewable.  To continue to serve in a position authorized by this certificate, the holder must       
R29 2Rcomplete the district intern program and obtain the preliminary credential.  A one calendar-year extension may be requested  
R29 3Rby the employer if the holder needs additional time to successfully complete the professional development plan and           
R29 4Rexperience requirements.                                                                                                     
R29F1RThis certificate is not renewable.  To continue to serve in a position authorized by this certificate, the holder must       
R29F2Rcomplete the district intern program and obtain the preliminary credential.                                                  
R30B1RTo renew this emergency permit, the holder must verify admission to a college or university that has a Commission-approved   
R30B2Rprogram for both the credential which authorizes this service and the teaching credential which is a prerequisite; must      
R30B3Rcomplete a minimum of six semester hours of course work approved by the college or university as applicable toward those     
R30B4Rcredentials; and must apply for renewal through the employing agency.                                                        
R30I1RTo renew this initial issuance of an emergency permit, the holder must complete the requirements listed. However, if the     
R30I2Remploying agency has an approved Plan to Develop Fully Qualified Educators on file with the Commission, in lieu of enrolling 
R30I3Rin an approved program and completing six semester units of appropriate course work, the holder may complete a minimum of    
R30I4Rninety clock hours of professional development activities directly related to the subject or class authorized by this        
R30I5Remergency permit.                                                                                                            
R30P1RTo renew this emergency permit, the holder must verify admission to a college or university that has a Commission-approved   
R30P2Rprogram for the teaching credential which is a prerequisite for the credential which authorizes this service; must complete  
R30P3Ra minimum of six semester hours of course work approved by the college or university as applicable toward that credential;   
R30P4Rand must apply for renewal through the employing agency.                                                                     
R30S1RTo renew this emergency permit, the holder must verify admission to a college or university that has a Commission-approved   
R30S2Rprogram for the credential which authorizes this service; must complete a minimum of six semester hours of course work       
R30S3Rapproved by the college or university as applicable toward that credential; and must apply for renewal through the employing 
R30S4Ragency.                                                                                                                      
R30X1RThe term of this emergency permit is limited by the term of the prerequisite credential.  To receive an extension of this    
R30X2Rpermit for the remainder of the emergency period to June 30 or January 31 as provided in regulation, the holder must renew   
R30X3Rthe prerequisite credential and must apply for the extension of this permit through the employing district, county, or       
R30X4Ragency.  The renewal requirements listed must be completed before the permit will be renewed following that June 30 or       
R30X5RJanuary 31 expiration date.                                                                                                  
R32 1RThis authorization cannot be renewed pursuant to Education Code 8301.1.                                                      
R3CL1 This document authorizes the holder to provide the following services to limited-English-proficient pupils:  (1) instruction 
R3CL2 for English language development in grades twelve and below, includingpreschool, and in the classes organized primarily for  
R3CL3 adults; and (2) specially designed content instruction delivered in English in special education classrooms in the area of   
R3CL4 specialization listed on this document.  This crosscultural, language and academic development authorization also covers     
R3CL5 classed authorized by other valid, non-emergency credentials held, as specified in Education Code Section 44253.3.           
R3CR1RWith the submission of an application and fee as specified above, the holder of this Certificate of Eligibility will receive 
R3CR2Ra two-year Preliminary Level I Credential.  To qualify for the three-year extension of that document, the holder must        
R3CR3Rcomplete the following requirements:#E;#N;#S;#L;#I;#U.  If the holder completes the listed requirements before applying for  
R3CR4Rthe preliminary credential, he or she may convert this Certificate of Eligibility to a Preliminary Level I Education         
R3CR5RSpecialist Credential valid for a full five years with verification of employment in California.                             
R3PD1 This credential authorizes the holder to instruct deaf and hearing-impaired pupils enrolled in state special schools, or in  
R3PD2 special classes for pupils with hearing impairments, in preschool, kindergarten through grade twelve, and in classes         
R3PD3 organized primarily for adults.                                                                                              
R57 1RThe holder must complete the following requirements:#F;#H;#M;#C.  When all requirements have been completed, the holder will 
R57 2Rbe eligible for a clear credential.                                                                                          
R61 1 Contact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
R61B1RThis permit cannot be renewed.  However, the holder will be eligible for the emergency permit which authorizes this service  
R61B2Rif he or she satisfies the Basic Skills Requirement and applies prior to the expiration date of this document. The holder    
R61B3Rmust also contact a college or university for an evaluation for both the clear credential which authorizes this service and  
R61B4Rthe teaching credential which is a prerequisite and must apply for the emergency permit through the employing district,      
R61B5Rcounty, or agency.                                                                                                           
R61E1RThis document cannot be renewed.  However, the holder will be eligible for the emergency permit which authorizes this        
R61E2Rservice if he or she satisfies the Basic Skills Requirement and applies prior to the expiration date of this document.  The  
R61E3Rholder must also contact a college or university for an evaluation for the teaching credential which is a prerequisite for   
R61E4Rclear credentials of this type and must apply for the emergency permit through the employing district, county, or agency.    
R61F1RThis permit cannot be renewed.  However, the holder will be eligible for the emergency permit which authorizes this service  
R61F2Rif he or she satisfies the Basic Skills Requirement and applies prior to the expiration date of this document.  The holder   
R61F3Rmust also contact a college or university for an evaluation for the clear credential which authorizes this service and must  
R61F4Rapply for the emergency permit through the employing district, county, or agency.                                            
R61M1RThis credential may not be renewed.  However, the holder will qualify for the emergency credential if he or she satisfies    
R61M2Rthe Basic Skills Requirement and applies for the emergency credential through the employing school district, county, or      
R61M3Ragency prior to the expiration date of this document.  To renew the emergency credential, the holder must seek admission to  
R61M4Ra college or univeristy that has a Commission-approved program for the clear credential which authorizes this service, must  
R61M5Rcomplete a minimum of six semester hours of course work approved by the college or university as applicable toward the       
R61M6Rcredential each year, and must apply through the employing school district, county, or agency.                               
R61N1RThis credential may not be renewed.  However, the holder will qualify for the clear credential if he or she satisfies the    
R61N2RBasic Skills Requirement and applies for this credential prior to the expiration date of this document.                      
R61O1RThis credential may not be renewed.  However, the holder will qualify for the clear credential if he or she satisfies the    
R61O2RBasic Skills Requirement and applies for this credential, and the prerequisite credential, prior to the expiration date of   
R61O3Rthis document.                                                                                                               
R61P1RThis credential may not be renewed.  However, the holder will qualify for the preliminary credential if he or she satisfies  
R61P2Rthe Basic Skills Requirement and applies for the preliminary credential, and the prerequisite credential, prior to the       
R61P3Rexpiration date of this document.  To renew the preliminary credential, the holder will have to complete two years of        
R61P4Rsuccessful full-time experience in a position requiring the credential and obtain the recommendation of a college or         
R61P5Runiversity with a Commission-approved program verifying the completion of advanced study in school administration, including 
R61P6Rappropriate field experience.  At least half of the program will have to be completed while the holder is employed in a      
R61P7Rposition requiring the credential.                                                                                           
R61Q1RThis permit may not be renewed.  However, the holder will qualify for the clear credential if he or she satisfies the Basic  
R61Q2RSkills Requirement and applies for this credential, and the prerequisite credential, prior to expiration date of this        
R61Q3Rdocument.                                                                                                                    
R61R1RThe holder will qualify for the preliminary credential if he or she satisfies the Basic Skills Requirement, continues to     
R61R2Rserve in an administrative position, and applies for the preliminary credential, and the prerequisite credential, prior to   
R61R3Rthe expiration date of this document.  To qualify for the clear credential, the holder must complete two years of successful 
R61R4Rexperience in a full-time administrative position in a public school or private school of equivalent status while holding a  
R61R5Rcredential authorizing the service, must maintain his or her valid prerequisite credential, and must obtain the              
R61R6Rrecommendation of a college or university with a Commission-approved program verifying the completion of an individualized   
R61R7Rprogram of advanced preparation designed in cooperation with the employing agency and the college or university.             
R61S1RThis credential may not be renewed.  The holder will qualify for the preliminary credential if he or she satisfies the Basic 
R61S2RSkills Requirement and applies for this credential prior to the expiration date of this document.                            
R62 1RThere are no additional requirements for the renewal of this credential; however, the term of this credential is limited by  
R62 2Rthe term of the prerequisite credential.  To renew this credential, the holder must also renew the prerequisite credential.  
R64 1RThis internship credential may not be renewed.  To continue to serve in a position authorized by this credential, the holder 
R64 2Rmust receive a formal recommendation from the supervising college or university for the preliminary or clear credential      
R64 3Rwhich authorizes this service.                                                                                               
R64P1RThe term of this internship credential is limited by the term of the prerequisite credential.  To renew this credential for  
R64P2Rthe remainder of the full two-year internship period allowed by law, the holder must renew the prerequisite credential,      
R64P3Rcontinue to participate in the internship program, and apply through the supervising college or university.                  
R65F1RThis credential may not be renewed.  To continue to serve in a position authorized by this credential, the holder must       
R65F2Rqualify for the clear credential which authorizes this service.                                                              
R65I1RTo renew this emergency credential, the holder must seek admission to a college or university that has a Commission-approved 
R65I2Rprogram for the clear credential which authorizes this service, must complete a minimum of six semester hours of course work 
R65I3Rapproved by the college or university as applicable toward that credential, and must apply through the employing school      
R65I4Rdistrict, county, or agency.                                                                                                 
R66 1RThis credential may be renewed for one-year periods upon the request of the governing board of the employing school district 
R66 2Rand at the discretion of the Commission.                                                                                     
R66F1RThis credential may be renewed as a clear document upon the request of the governing board of the employing school district  
R66F2Rand at the discretion of the Commission.                                                                                     
R67 1RTo renew this credential, the holder must complete two years of successful experience as a school nurse, finish a Commission 
R67 2Rapproved school nurse program, and receive the recommendation of the college or university where the program was taken.      
R67C1RTo renew this credential, the holder must complete a Commission-approved school nurse program and receive the recommendation 
R67C2Rof the college or university where the program was taken.                                                                    
R68 1RContact credentials@ctc.ca.gov for specific information.                                                                     
R6811RThe term of this credential extension is limited by the term of the prerequisite credential.  To renew this credential       
R6812Rextension for the remainder of the one-year appeal period, the holder must renew the prerequisite credential.  During the    
R6813Rfull one-year period of this credential extension, the holder must complete the requirements listed.                         
R6821RThe term of this credential extension is limited by the term of the prerequisite credential.  To renew this credential       
R6822Rextension for the remainder of the two-year appeal period, the holder must renew the prerequisite credential.  During the    
R6823Rfull two-year period of this credential extension, the holder must complete the requirements listed.                         
R68A1RTo renew this credential, the holder must complete two years of successful full-time experience in a position requiring this 
R68A2Rcredential and must obtain the recommendation of a college or university with a Commission-approved program verifying the    
R68A3Rcompletion of advanced study in school administration, including appropriate field experience.  At least half of the program 
R68A4Rmust be completed while the holder is employed in a position requiring this credential.  If the holder is unable to obtain   
R68A5Remployment as an administrator until too late to complete the requirements during the valid period of this credential, he or 
R68A6Rshe may apply for a three-year extension from the date of employment, as long as the prerequisite credential is also valid   
R68A7Rduring that period of time.                                                                                                  
R68B1RTo renew this credential, the holder must complete two years of successful experience in a full-time administrative position 
R68B2Rin a public school or private school of equivalent status while holding this preliminary credential, must maintain his or    
R68B3Rher valid prerequisite credential, and must obtain the recommendation of a college or university with a Commission-approved  
R68B4Rprogram verifying the completion of an individualized program of advanced preparation designed in cooperation with the       
R68B5Remploying agency and the college or university.                                                                              
R68C1RThis preliminary credential may not be renewed.  To qualify for the clear credential, the holder must complete two years of  
R68C2Rsuccessful experience in a full-time administrative position in a public school or a private school of equivalent status     
R68C3Rwhile holding this preliminary credential.  The holder must maintain his or her valid prerequisite credential.  In addition, 
R68C4Rthe holder must complete one of the following options: (1) obtain the recommendation of a college or university verifying    
R68C5Rcompletion of a Commission-approved individualized program of advanced preparation designed in cooperation with the          
R68C6Remploying agency and the college or university; or (2) meet a Mastery of Fieldwork Performance Standards through a           
R68C7RCommission-approved program and obtain the recommendation from the college or university that conducted the evaluation; or   
R68C8R(3) complete a Commission-approved alternative program based on Commission-adopted guidelines resulting in the online        
R68C9Rrecommendation from the program sponsor.                                                                                     
R68D1RTo renew this credential, the holder must complete two years of successful experience in a full-time administrative position 
R68D2Rin a public school or private school of equivalent status while holding this preliminary credential, and obtain the          
R68D3Rrecommendation of a college or university with a Commission-approved program verifying the completion of an individualized   
R68D4Rprogram of advanced preparation designed in cooperation with the employing agency and the college or university.             
R68E1RThis credential has been extended so that the holder may complete two years of successful full-time experience in a position 
R68E2Rrequiring the credential and obtain the recommendation of a college or university with a Commission-approved program         
R68E3Rverifying the completion of advanced study in school administration, including appropriate field experience.  At least half  
R68E4Rof the program must be completed while the holder is employed in a position requiring this credential.                       
R68F1RThis credential has been extended so that the holder may complete two years of successful experience in a full-time          
R68F2Radministrative position in a public school or private school of equivalent status and obtain the recommendation of a college 
R68F3Ror university with a Commission-approved program verifying the completion of an individualized program of advanced           
R68F4Rpreparation designed in cooperation with the employing agency and the college or university.                                 
R68L1RThe term of this credential is limited by the term of the prerequisite credential.  To renew this credential for the         
R68L2Rremainder of the five-year preliminary period allowed by law, the holder must renew the prerequisite credential.  During the 
R68L3Rfive-year preliminary period of this credential, the holder must complete two years of successful experience in a full-time  
R68L4Radministrative position in a public school or a private school of equivalent status and must maintain his or her valid       
R68L5Rprerequisite credential.  In addition, the holder must complete one of the following options: (1) obtain the recommendation  
R68L6Rof a college or university verifying completion of a Commission-approved individualized program of advanced preparation      
R68L7Rdesigned in cooperation with the employing agency and the college or university; or (2)  meet a Mastery of Fieldwork         
R68L8RPerformance Standards through a Commission-approved program and obtain the recommendation from the college or university     
R68L9Rthat conducted the evaluation; or (3) complete a Commission-approved alternative program based on Commission-adopted         
R68LARguidelines resulting in the online recommendation from the program sponsor.                                                  
R68O1RThis preliminary credential may not be renewed.  To qualify for the clear credential, the holder must complete two years of  
R68O2Rsuccessful experience in a full-time administrative position in a public school or a private school of equivalent status     
R68O3Rwhile holding this preliminary credential.  In addition, the holder must complete one of the following options: (1) obtain   
R68O4Rthe recommendation of a college or university verifying completion of a Commission-approved individualized program of        
R68O5Radvanced preparation designed in cooperation with the employing agency and the college or university; or (2) verify          
R68O6Rcompletion of Modules 1, 2, and 3 of a California State Board of Education-approved AB 75 Principal Training Program or AB   
R68O7R430 Administrator Training Program; or (3) meet a Mastery of Fieldwork Performance Standards through a Commission-approved   
R68O8Rprogram and obtain the recommendation from the college or university that conducted the evaluation; or (4) complete a        
R68O9RCommission-approved alternative program based on Commission-adopted guidelines resulting in the online recommendation from   
R68OARthe program sponsor.                                                                                                         
R68P1RThe term of this credential is limited by the term of the prerequisite credential.  To renew this credential for the         
R68P2Rremainder of the five-year preliminary period allowed by law, the holder must renew the prerequisite credential.  During the 
R68P3Rfive-year preliminary period of this credential, the holder must complete two years of successful full-time experience in a  
R68P4Rposition requiring this credential and must obtain the recommendation of a college or university with a Commission-approved  
R68P5Rprogram verifying the completion of advanced study in school administration, including appropriate field experience.  At     
R68P6Rleast half of the program must be completed while the holder is employed in a position requiring this credential.  If the    
R68P7Rholder is unable to obtain employment as an administrator until too late to complete the requirements during the valid       
R68P8Rperiod of this credential, he or she may apply for a three-year extension from the date of employment, as long as the        
R68P9Rprerequisite credential is also valid during that period of time.                                                            
R68Q1RThe term of this credential is limited by the term of the prerequisite credential.  To renew this credential for the         
R68Q2Rremainder of the five-year preliminary period allowed by law, the holder must renew the prerequisite credential.  During the 
R68Q3Rfive-year preliminary period of this credential, the holder must complete two years of successful experience in a full-time  
R68Q4Radministrative position in a public school or private school of equivalent status, must maintain his or her valid            
R68Q5Rprerequisite credential, and must obtain the recommendation of a college or university with a Commission-approved program    
R68Q6Rverifying the completion of an individualized program of advanced preparation designed in cooperation with the employing     
R68Q7Ragency and the college or university.                                                                                        
R68R1RThis credential has been extended so that the holder may complete a program of advanced study in school administration,      
R68R2Rincluding appropriate field experience, and receive the recommendation of the college or university where the program was    
R68R3Rcompleted.  At least half of the program must be completed while the holder is employed in a position requiring this         
R68R4Rcredential.                                                                                                                  
R68S1RThis credential has been extended so that the holder may complete an individualized program of advanced preparation designed 
R68S2Rin cooperation with the employing agency and the college or university, and may obtain the recommendation of the college or  
R68S3Runiversity where the Commission-approved program was completed.                                                              
R68T1RThis credential has been extended so that the holder may complete two years of successful experience in a full-time          
R68T2Radministrative position in a public school or a private school of equivalent status.  In addition, the holder must complete  
R68T3Rone of the following options: (1) obtain the recommendation of a college or university verifying completion of a             
R68T4RCommission-approved individualized program of advanced preparation designed in cooperation with the employing agency and the 
R68T5Rcollege or university; or (2) verify completion of Modules 1, 2, and 3 of a California State Board of Education-approved AB  
R68T6R75 Principal Training Program or AB 430 Administrator Training Program; or (3) meet a Mastery of Fieldwork Performance       
R68T7RStandards through a Commission-approved program and obtain the recommendation from the college or university that conducted  
R68T8Rthe evaluation; or (4) complete a Commission-approved alternative program based on Commission-adopted guidelines resulting   
R68T9Rin the online recommendation from the program sponsor.                                                                       
R68U1RDuring the five-year preliminary period of this credential, the holder must complete two years of successful experience in a 
R68U2Rfull-time administrative position in a public school or a private school of equivalent status.  In addition, the holder must 
R68U3Rcomplete one of the following options: (1) obtain the recommendation of a college or university verifying completion of a    
R68U4RCommission-approved individualized program of advanced preparation designed in cooperation with the employing agency and the 
R68U5Rcollege or university; or (2)  meet a Mastery of Fieldwork Performance Standards through a Commission-approved program and   
R68U6Robtain the recommendation from the college or university that conducted the evaluation; or (3) complete a                    
R68U7RCommission-approved alternative program based on Commission-adopted guidelines resulting in the online recommendation from   
R68U8Rthe program sponsor.                                                                                                         
R68W1RService on this preliminary credential is limited to the employing agency in the online Employment Restriction field.        
R68W2RVerification of five years of full-time teaching, services, and/or administrative services experience and completion of a    
R68W3RCommission-approved program will be required to qualify for the clear credential.  The holder may, but is not required to,   
R68W4Rremove the employer restriction during the valid period of the preliminary by submitting an application, fee, and            
R68W5R verification of five years of full-time experience.                                                                         
R68X1RThe term of this credential extension is limited by the term of the prerequisite credential.  To renew this credential       
R68X2Rextension for the remainder of the full three-year period allowed by law, the holder must renew the prerequisite.  During    
R68X3Rthe three-year period of this credential extension, the holder must complete two years of successful full-time experience in 
R68X4Ra position requiring the credential and obtain the recommendation of a college or university with a Commission-approved      
R68X5Rprogram verifying the completion of advanced study in school administration, including appropriate field experience.  At     
R68X6Rleast half of the program must be completed while the holder is employed in a position requiring this credential.            
R69 1RTo renew this credential, the holder needs to submit only an application and fee to the Commission prior to the expiration   
R69 2Rdate.  The renewal period is five years.                                                                                     
R69L1RThis credential need not be renewed.  The authorization shall remain in force as long as the valid prerequisite teaching     
R69L2Rcredential is held concurrently.                                                                                             
R7O 1ROnce the holder qualifies for the first step credential, he or she will have five years during which to receive a            
R7O 2Rrecommendation from an approved Local Education Agency and complete the following requirements: a minimum of two years of    
R7O 3Rsuccessful part-time teaching experience as authorized by this credential and four semester units or 60 clock hours in an    
R7O 4Rapproved program of personalized preparation.                                                                                
R86C1RThis preliminary credential may not be renewed.  To qualify for the clear credential, the holder must complete two years of  
R86C2Rsuccessful experience in a full-time administrative position in a public school or a private school of equivalent status     
R86C3Rwhile holding this preliminary credential.  The holder must maintain his or her valid prerequisite credential.  In addition, 
R86C4Rthe holder must complete a Commission-approved Administrative Services Credential clear induction program and obtain an      
R86C5Ronline recommendation for the clear credential from the induction program sponsor.                                           
R86L1RThe term of this credential is limited by the term of the prerequisite credential.  To renew this credential for the         
R86L2Rremainder of the five-year preliminary period allowed by law, the holder must renew the prerequisite credential.  During the 
R86L3Rfive-year preliminary period of this credential, the holder must complete two years of successful experience in a full-time  
R86L4Radministrative position in a public school or a private school of equivalent status and must maintain his or her valid       
R86L5Rprerequisite credential.  In addition, the holder must complete a Commission-approved Administrative Services Credential     
R86L6Rclear induction program and obtain an online recommendation for the clear credential from the induction program sponsor.     
R86O1RThis preliminary credential may not be renewed.  To qualify for the clear credential, the holder must complete two years of  
R86O2Rsuccessful experience in a full-time administrative position in a public school or a private school of equivalent status     
R86O3Rwhile holding this preliminary credential.  In addition, the holder must complete a Commission-approved Administrative       
R86O4RServices Credential clear induction program and obtain an online recommendation for the clear credential from the induction  
R86O5Rprogram sponsor.                                                                                                             
R86T1RThis credential has been extended so that the holder may complete two years of successful experience in a full-time          
R86T2Radministrative position in a public school or a private school of equivalent status.  In addition, the holder must complete  
R86T3Ra Commission-approved Administrative Services Credential clear induction program and obtain an online recommendation for the 
R86T4Rclear credential from the induction program sponsor.                                                                         
R88 1RThis credential need not be renewed as long as the holder maintains his or her clear credential of this type as a valid      
R88 2Rdocument.                                                                                                                    
RA011 To renew this credential for the remainder of the five-year time period provided by law, the holder must complete a minimum  
RA012 of fifteen semester hours of undergraduate course work approved by Simpson College.                                          
RC  1RThe holder must satisfy the Basic Skills Requirement within one year of the issuance date of this document in order to be    
RC  2Religible to continue teaching.                                                                                               
RC2 1 In order to be eligible to continue teaching on this document, the holder must satisfy the Basic Skills Requirement as       
RC2 2 stated on the holder's first issuance of a California teaching credential.                                                   
RCC 1RIn order to be eligible to continue teaching on this document, the holder must satisfy the Basic Skills Requirement as       
RCC 2Rstated on the holder's first issuance of a California teaching credential.                                                   
RE3 1RTo renew this credential, the holder must complete the California Beginning Teacher Support and Assessment (BTSA) program or 
RE3 2Ra Commission-approved alternative program of beginning teacher induction.                                                    
RE5 1RTo renew this credential, the holder must complete a minimum of 150 clock hours of activities that contribute to his or her  
RE5 2Rcompetence, performance, and effectiveness in the education profession and that assist the holder in meeting or exceeding    
RE5 3Rthe California Standards for the Teaching Profession.                                                                        
READ1RThe holder must complete the developing English language skills, including reading, requirement.                             
REL 1RThe holder must earn a California English learner authorization.                                                             
RG3 1RTo renew this credential, the holder must complete a Commission accredited categorical program in the disability area listed 
RG3 2Ron this document.  The holder must also complete the California Beginning Teacher Support and Assessment (BTSA) program or a 
RG3 3RCommission-approved alternative program of beginning teacher induction.                                                      
RG5 1RTo renew this credential, the holder must complete a Commission accredited categorical program in the disability area listed 
RG5 2Ron this document.  The holder must also complete a minimum of 150 clock hours of activities that contribute to his or her    
RG5 3Rcompetence, performance, and effectiveness in the education profession and that assist the holder in meeting or exceeding    
RG5 4Rthe California Standards for the Teaching Profession.                                                                        
RICA1RPer Executive Order, the credential holder must complete the Reading Instruction Competence Assessment (RICA) prior to       
RICA2Rissuance of the clear credential.                                                                                            
RPD 1RTo renew this credential, the holder must complete an assessment of his or her job-related skills as described in the        
RPD 2Renclosed Implementation Manual for the Verification of Proficiency for Preliminary Credential Holders Who Are Prelingually   
RPD 3RDeaf.  The employing agency must enclose a letter with the application for renewal signed by the three panel members who     
RPD 4Rperformed the assessment verifying the holder's proficiency on the job.  It is the holder's responsibility to inform the     
RPD 5Remploying agency of the need for the assessment.                                                                             
RPD11RTo renew this credential for the remainder of the five-year preliminary time period, the holder must complete an assessment  
RPD12Rof his or her job-related skills as described in the enclosed Implementation Manual for the Verification of Proficiency for  
RPD13RPreliminary Credential Holders who are Prelingually Deaf.  The employing agency must enclose a letter with the application   
RPD14Rfor renewal signed by the three panel members who performed the assessment verifying the holder's proficiency on the job.    
RPD15R It is the holder's responsibility to inform the employing agency of the need for this assessment.                           
RPD21RA preliminary credential may be held for no more than five years.  To qualify for the Clear/Level II Credential, the holder  
RPD22Rmust do the following: (1) complete two years of successful experience in a full-time position providing direct instruction  
RPD23Rto special education students in a public school, or private school of equivalent status, while holding a preliminary        
RPD24Rcredential, and (2) obtain the recommendation of a college or university with a Level II education specialist program        
RPD25Raccredited by the Commission's Committee on Accreditation verifying the completion of an individualized program of advanced  
RPD26Rpreparation designed by the holder in cooperation with the employing agency and the college or university.  In addition, the 
RPD27Rholder must verify completion of the requirements for health education and computers in education.                           
RPD31RA preliminary credential may be held for no more than five years.  To qualify for the Clear Level II Credential, the holder  
RPD32Rmust do the following: (1) complete two years of successful experience in a full-time position providing services to deaf    
RPD33Rand hearing impaired pupils who are enrolled in state special schools or in special classes for pupils for hearing           
RPD34Rimpairments, while holding a preliminary credential, and (2) complete an assessment of his or her job related skills as      
RPD35Rdescribed in the enclosed manual. The employing agency must enclose a letter with the application for renewal signed by the  
RPD36Rthree panel members who performed the assessment verifying the holder's proficiency on the job.  It is the holder's          
RPD37Rresponsibility to inform the employing agency of the need for this assessment.                                               
RPDA1RThe holder must inform the employer of the need for an assessment of his or her job-related skills to be completed at the    
RPDA2Rend of the second year on a valid document as described in "The Basic Skills Test Exemption for Prelingually Deaf            
RPDA3RCandidates" guide.                                                                                                           
RPDB1RThe Commission cannot issue any other document until the holder completes an assessment of his or her  job-related skills as 
RPDB2Rdescribed in "The Basic Skills Test Exemption for Prelingually Deaf Candidates" guide.  This assessment must be documented   
RPDB3Rand signed by the three panel members who verified proficiency on the job.                                                   
RPDE1RIn addition to the assessment listed, the holder must verify subject-matter competence as required for either a Multiple     
RPDE2RSubject or Single Subject Teaching Credential either by completing a Commission-approved subject-matter program or by        
RPDE3Rpassing the equivalent subject-matter examinations.                                                                          
RS2 1RThe holder must earn a masters degree (or the equivalent in semester units) from a regionally accredited college or          
RS2 2Runiversity or 150 clock hours of activities that contribute to his or her competence, performance, and effectiveness in the  
RS2 3Reducation profession, and that assist the holder in meeting or exceeding the California Standards for the Teaching           
RS2 4RProfession.                                                                                                                  
RS3 1RTo renew this credential, the holder must complete the California Beginning Teacher Support and Assessment (BTSA) program or 
RS3 2Ra Commission-approved alternative program of beginning teacher induction.                                                    
RS3O1ROnce the holder qualifies for the first step credential, he or she will have three years during which to complete the        
RS3O2RCalifornia Beginning Teacher Support and Assessment (BTSA) program or a Commission-approved alternative program of beginning 
RS3O3Rteacher induction.  When the program has been completed, the holder will be eligible for a clear credential that will        
RS3O4Rinclude the completion of professional growth and service requirements as a condition for each five-year renewal.            
RS5 1RTo renew this credential, the holder must complete a minimum of 150 clock hours of activities that contribute to his or her  
RS5 2Rcompetence, performance, and effectiveness in the education profession, and that assist the holder in meeting or exceeding   
RS5 3Rthe California Standards for the Teaching Profession.                                                                        
RS5O1ROnce the holder qualifies for the first step credential, he or she will have five years during which to complete a minimum   
RS5O2Rof 150 clock hours of activities that contribute to his or her competence, performance, and effectiveness in the education   
RS5O3Rprofession, and that assist the holder in meeting or exceeding the California Standards for the Teaching profession.  When   
RS5O4Rthe activities have been completed, the holder will be eligible for a clear credential that will include the completion of   
RS5O5Rprofessional growth and service requirements as a condition for each five-year renewal.                                      
RSG 1RThe holder must complete the equivalent of a Commission-approved preliminary program in the specialty area listed on this    
RSG 2Rdocument.                                                                                                                    
RSGN1RThe holder must complete a Commission-approved special education induction program and obtain formal recommendation from the 
RSGN2Rprogram sponsor.                                                                                                             
RSMC1RThe holder must complete the Subject Matter Competence requirement.                                                          
RSN 1RThe holder must complete a Commission-approved Level II Education Specialist Program at a California college or university   
RSN 2Ror a special education induction program and obtain formal recommendation from the program sponsor.                          
S31 1RThis certificate may not be used if the prerequisite teaching credential is allowed to expire.  To renew this certificate,   
S31 2Rthe holder must also hold a valid non-emergency California special education teaching credential and must complete a         
S31 3RCommission-approved program for the clear authorization.                                                                     
S31B1RThis certificate need not be renewed.  The authorization shall remain in force as long as the valid prerequisite credential  
S31B2Ror permit is held concurrently.                                                                                              
S31C1RThis certificate need not be renewed.  The authorization shall remain in force as long as the valid prerequisite teaching    
S31C2Rcredential is held concurrently.                                                                                             
S31E1RThis certificate may not be renewed.  However, the holder will be eligible for the emergency permit which authorizes this    
S31E2Rservice if he or she satisfies the Basic Skills Requirement and applies through the employing district, county, or agency    
S31E3Rprior to the expiration date of this document.  The Commission is in the process of transitioning from the current structure 
S31E4Rfor special education credentials to a new structure.  The differences between the two structures are explained on the       
S31E5Renclosed leaflet.  The holder will need to select the structure best suited to his or her needs and background.              
S31I1RThis internship certificate may not be renewed.  To continue to serve in a position authorized by this certificate, the      
S31I2Rholder must receive a formal recommendation for the clear certificate from the supervising college or university.            
S31O1RThis certificate may not be renewed.  However, the holder will qualify for the clear certificate if he or she satisfies the  
S31O2RBasic Skills Requirement and applies for this certificate, and the prerequisite teaching credential, prior to the expiration 
S31O3Rdate of this document.                                                                                                       
S31P1RThe term of this internship certificate is limited by the term of the prerequisite credential.  To renew this certificate to 
S31P2Rthe full two-year internship period allowed by law, the holder must renew the prerequisite credential, continue to           
S31P3Rparticipate in the internship program, and apply through the supervising college or university.                              
S31R1RIn addition to the renewal requirements listed, the holder must verify the completion of one additional semester or two      
S31R2Radditional quarters of full-time experience in a general education classroom.                                                
S31S1RIn addition to the renewal requirements listed, the holder must verify the completion of one additional semester or two      
S31S2Radditional quarters of full-time experience in a special education classroom.                                                
S33 1RThere are no additional requirements for the renewal of this credential; however, the term of this credential is limited by  
S33 2Rthe term of the prerequisite credential.  To renew this credential, the holder must also renew the prerequisite credential.  
S35 1RTo renew this credential, the holder needs to submit only an application and fee to the Commission prior to the expiration   
S35 2Rdate.  The renewal period is five years.                                                                                     
S36 1RThis credential need not be renewed.  The authorization shall remain in force as long as the valid prerequisite teaching     
S36 2Rcredential is held concurrently.                                                                                             
S36O1RThis credential may not be renewed.  However, the holder will qualify for the clear credential if he or she satisfies the    
S36O2RBasic Skills Requirement and applies for this credential, and the prerequisite credential, prior to the expiration date of   
S36O3Rthis document.                                                                                                               
S38 1RThis certificate need not be renewed.  The authorization shall remain in force as long as the valid prerequisite services    
S38 2Rcredential is held concurrently.                                                                                             
SBW 1RThis document has been issued on the basis of a waiver of credential requirements by the State Board of Education consistent 
SBW 2Rwith the authority established in Education Code Sections 33050-53 at the request of the employing agency.  The holder must  
SBW 3Rcomplete all of the requirements listed.                                                                                     
SLM21PPursuant to California Family Code Section 17520, this temporary document is valid for only one hundred and fifty days. The  
SLM22Plaw does not permit any extension of this temporary document.  Requirements for this document for its full term have been    
SLM23Pexplained in a letter to the applicant.                                                                                      
SLM21RPursuant to California Family Code Section 17520, this temporary document is valid for only one hundred and fifty days. The  
SLM22Rlaw does not permit any extension of this temporary document.  Requirements for this document for its full term have been    
SLM23Rexplained in a letter to the applicant.                                                                                      
SLMS1 Pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Section 11350.6, this temporary document is valid for only one hundred and fifty   
SLMS2 days.  The law does not permit any extension of this temporary document.  Requirements for issuance of this document for its 
SLMS3 full term have been explained in a letter to the applicant.                                                                  
SLPT1RThe holder must verify passage of the Educational Testing Services Praxis II Speech-Language Pathology Test. Possession of a 
SLPT2Rvalid California Speech-Language Pathology License issued by the California Speech-Language Pathology and Audiology Board or 
SLPT3Ran original Certification Letter from the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA) verifying possession of a      
SLPT4Rvalid Certificate of Clinical Competence in Speech-Language Pathology satisfies this requirement.                            
SPOP1 The holder must complete the Special Populations requirement.                                                                
SR311RThis certificate may not be used if the prerequisite teaching credential is allowed to expire.  To renew this certificate,   
SR312Rthe holder must also hold a valid non-emergency California special education teaching credential and must complete a         
SR313RCommission-approved program for the clear certificate.  In addition to the renewal requirements listed, the holder must      
SR314Rverify the completion of one additional semester or two additional quarters of full-time experience in a regular classroom.  
SS311RThis certificate may not be used if the prerequisite teaching credential is allowed to expire.  To renew this certificate,   
SS312Rthe holder must also hold a valid non-emergency California special education teaching credential and must complete a         
SS313RCommission-approved program for the clear certificate.  In addition to the renewal requirements listed, the holder must      
SS314Rverify the completion of one additional semester or two additional quarters of full-time experience in a special education   
SS315Rclassroom.                                                                                                                   
STP 1RThis certificate may not be renewed.                                                                                         
SUBB1RTo continue to serve as a substitute teacher after this credential expires, the holder must apply through the school         
SUBB2Rdistrict or county office of education where he or she is employed or is seeking employment.                                 
SUBW1RThis credential is not renewable.  To continue to serve as a substitute teacher after this credential expires, the holder    
SUBW2Rmust verify completion of a baccalaureate or higher degree from a regionally accredited college or university and must apply 
SUBW3Rthrough the school district or county office of education where he or she is employed or is seeking employment.              
TPA 1RPer Executive Order, the credential holder must complete the Commission-approved Teacher Performance Assessment (TPA) prior  
TPA 2Rto issuance of the clear credential.                                                                                         
TPL11RThis is the holder's initial TPSL permit.  To renew this permit, the holder must complete an additional 45 hours of TPSL     
TPL12Rpreparation as verified by the Local Employing Agency. The application for renewal must be submitted by the Local Employing  
TPL13RAgency.                                                                                                                      
TPL21RThis is the holder's second TPSL permit.  To renew this permit, the holder must complete an additional 45 hours of TPSL      
TPL22Rpreparation as verified by the Local Employing Agency.  The application for renewal must be submitted by the Local Employing 
TPL23RAgency.                                                                                                                      
TPL31RTo renew this permit, the holder must complete professional learning activities as required by the Local Employing Agency.   
TPL32R The application for renewal must be submitted by the Local Employing Agency.                                                
US  1RThe holder must complete the U.S. Constitution requirement.                                                                  
VFC 1RThis preliminary credential may not be renewed.  To qualify for the Clear Single Subject Teaching Credential, the holder     
VFC 2Rmust have been issued the Preliminary Visiting Faculty Single Subject Teaching Credential; and must either; 1) complete an   
VFC 3Rindividualized professional development plan including verification of completion by the employing agency; or 2) complete a  
VFC 4RCommission-approved induction program including verification of completion by the program sponsor.                           
VFP11RTo renew this permit, the holder must verify completion of a three semester or four quarter unit departmentalized            
VFP12Rmethodology course; and must apply for renewal through the employing agency.                                                 
VFP21RTo renew this permit, the holder must apply for renewal through the employing agency.                                        
VFP31RThis permit may not be renewed.  To continue to serve in the position authorized by this permit, the holder must qualify for 
VFP32Rthe Preliminary Visiting Faculty Single Subject Teaching Credential.  To qualify for the Preliminary Visiting Faculty Single 
VFP33RSubject Teaching Credential, the holder must have been issued the Visiting Faculty Teaching Permit; provide two years of     
VFP34Rrecent evaluations from a California public school employer covering employment based on the Visiting Faculty Permit;        
VFP35Rcomplete a three semester or four quarter unit departmentalized methodology course; hold a California English learner        
VFP36Rauthorization; and must apply through the employing agency.                                                                  
W12 1RUpon completion of the waived requirement(s), the holder will qualify for the preliminary credential. Once the holder        
W12 2Rapplies for the preliminary credential, he or she will have one year to complete the following requirements:#R;#U;#E.  The   
W12 3Rcredential may be renewed for the remainder of the five-year preliminary time period provided by law. Before the end of the  
W12 4Rfive-year time period, the holder must also complete the following requirements:#F;#H;#M;#C.  When all requirements have     
W12 5Rbeen completed, the holder will be eligible for a clear credential.                                                          
W12R1RIf the holder is again unable to complete the waived requirement(s), he or she must complete a minimum of six semester hours 
W12R2Rof course work applicable toward the following requirements, or must complete all remaining requirements if fewer than six   
W12R3Rsemester hours are needed, and must apply through the employing district, county, or agency:#R;#U;#E.  When these            
W12R4Rrequirements have been completed, the holder may apply for a five-year preliminary credential.  Before the end of the        
W12R5Rfive-year time period, the holder must also complete the following requirements:#F;#H;#M;#C.  When all requirements have     
W12R6Rbeen completed, the holder will be eligible for a clear credential.                                                          
W13R1RThe waived requirement is one year of work experience within the three years immediately preceding the issuance of the       
W13R2Rpreliminary credential.  To qualify for the credential which authorizes this service without the waiver, the holder must     
W13R3Rcomplete one year of service as explained on the enclosed leaflet.                                                           
W14 1RUpon completion of the waived requirement(s), the holder will qualify for the preliminary credential. Once the holder        
W14 2Rapplies for the preliminary credential, he or she will have five years to complete the following requirements:#F;#H;#M;#C.   
W14 3R When all requirements have been completed, the holder will be eligible for a clear credential.                              
W14R1RIf the holder is again unable to complete the waived requirement(s), he or she must complete a minimum of six semester hours 
W14R2Rof course work applicable toward the clear credential, or must complete all remaining requirements if fewer than six         
W14R3Rsemester hours are necessary, and must apply through the employing district, county, or agency. The requirements for the     
W14R4Rclear credential are as follows:#F;#H;#M;#C.  When all requirements have been completed, the holder will be eligible for a   
W14R5Rclear credential.                                                                                                            
W18B1RIn addition to completing the waived requirement(s), to qualify for the emergency credential which authorizes this service   
W18B2Rthe holder must seek admission to a college or university that has a Commission-approved program for both the specialist     
W18B3Rcredential which authorizes this service and the teaching credential which is a prerequisite, and must apply through the     
W18B4Remploying district, county, or agency.                                                                                       
W18L1RIn addition to completing the waived requirement(s), to qualify for the emergency credential or permit which authorizes this 
W18L2Rservice the holder must seek admission to a college or university that has a Commission-approved program for the credential  
W18L3Rand must apply through the employing district, county, or agency.                                                            
W18R1RIf the holder is again unable to complete the waived requirement(s), he or she must seek admission to a college or           
W18R2Runiversity that has a Commission-approved program for the credential which authorizes this service, must complete six        
W18R3Rsemester hours of course work approved by the college or university as applicable toward the credential, and must apply      
W18R4Rthrough the employing district, county, or agency.                                                                           
W19P1RIn addition to completing the waived requirement(s), to qualify for the preliminary credential which authorizes this service 
W19P2Rthe holder must provide written acknowledgment from himself or herself and the employing school district that he or she is   
W19P3Rresponsible for completing the requirements for the Multiple or Single Subject Teaching Credential, including the student    
W19P4Rteaching requirement, during the five-year term of the preliminary credential or before another credential authorizing       
W19P5Rspecial education instruction will be issued.                                                                                
W20P1RUpon completion of the waived requirement(s), the holder will be eligible for a clear specialist credential and the          
W20P2Rprerequisite teaching credential.                                                                                            
W26O1RUpon completion of the waived requirement(s), the holder will be eligible for a two-year preliminary Sojourn Credential.  He 
W26O2Ror she must apply through the employing district, county, or agency for that preliminary credential.                         
W26R1RIf the holder is again unable to complete the waived requirement(s), he or she must complete a minimum of six semester hours 
W26R2Rof course work applicable toward the preliminary or clear credential which authorizes this service, and must apply through   
W26R3Rthe employing district, county, or agency.                                                                                   
W30B1RIn addition to completing the waived requirement(s), to qualify for the emergency permit which authorizes this service, the  
W30B2Rholder must seek admission to a college or university that has a Commission-approved program for both the clear credential   
W30B3Rwhich authorizes this service and the teaching credential which is a prerequisite, and must apply through the employing      
W30B4Rdistrict, county, or agency.                                                                                                 
W30P1RIn addition to completing the waived requirement(s), to qualify for the emergency permit which authorizes this service the   
W30P2Rholder must seek admission to a college or university that has a Commission-approved program for the teaching credential     
W30P3Rwhich is a prerequisite for the clear credential of this type and must apply through the employing district, county, or      
W30P4Ragency.                                                                                                                      
W30S1RIn addition to completing the waived requirement(s), to qualify for the emergency permit which authorizes this service the   
W30S2Rholder must seek admission to a college or university that has a Commission-approved program for the clear credential which  
W30S3Rauthorizes this service and must apply through the employing district, county, or agency.                                    
W68A1RUpon completion of the waived requirement(s), the holder will qualify for a preliminary Administrative Services Credential.  
W68A2RDuring the term of the preliminary credential, the holder must complete two years of successful full- time experience in an  
W68A3Radministrative position and must obtain the recommendation of a college or university with a Commission-approved program     
W68A4Rverifying the completion of advanced study in school administration, including appropriate field experience.  At least half  
W68A5Rof the program must be completed while the holder is employed in a position requiring the credential.                        
W68R1 If the holder is again unable to complete the waived requirement(s), he or she must complete a minimum of six semester hours 
W68R2 of course work approved as applicable toward the credential which authorizes this service by a college or university with a  
W68R3 Commission-approved program for this credential, and must apply through the employing district, county, or agency.           
WB  1RThe waived requirement is possession of a baccalaureate or higher degree from a regionally accredited college or university. 
WB  2RTo qualify for the credential, permit or certificate which authorizes this service without the waiver, the holder must       
WB  3Rcomplete an appropriate degree program.                                                                                      
WBL 1RThe waived requirement is possession of a baccalaureate or higher degree from a regionally accredited college or university. 
WBL 2RTo qualify for the credential or permit which authorizes this service without the waiver, the holder must complete an        
WBL 3Rappropriate baccalaureate or higher degree.                                                                                  
WBS 1RTo continue to serve as a substitute teacher after this credential or permit expires, the holder must verify completion of a 
WBS 2Rbaccalaureate or higher degree from a regionally accredited college or university and must apply through the school district 
WBS 3Ror county office of education where he or she is employed or is seeking employment, or directly to the Commission.           
WBSR1RIf the holder is again unable to complete a bachelor's or higher degree from a regionally accredited college or university,  
WBSR2Rhe or she must complete a minimum of six semester hours of course work applicable toward that degree, and must apply through 
WBSR3Rthe employing district, county, or agency.                                                                                   
WC  1RThe waived requirement is satisfying the Basic Skills Requirement.  To qualify for the credential or permit which authorizes 
WC  2Rthis service without the waiver, the holder must satisfy the Basic Skills Requirement.                                       
WCBS1RRegardless of the expiration date listed above, this credential or permit expires with the waiver if the holder does not     
WCBS2Rsatisfy the Basic Skills Requirement.  If the holder satisfies the Basic Skills Requirement, he or she may substitute until  
WCBS3Rthe expiration date.  To continue to serve as a substitute teacher after this credential or permit expires, the holder must  
WCBS4Rverify completion of a baccalaureate or higher degree from a regionally accredited college or university; must include       
WCBS5Rverification of satisfying the Basic Skills Requirement; and must apply through the school district or county office of      
WCBS6Reducation where he or she is employed or is seeking employment, or directly to the Commission.                               
WCS 1RRegardless of the expiration date listed above, this credential or permit expires with the waiver if the holder does not     
WCS 2Rsatisfy the Basic Skills Requirement.  If the holder satisfies the Basic Skills Requirement, he or she may substitute until  
WCS 3Rthe expiration date.  To continue to serve as a substitute teacher after this credential or permit expires, the holder must  
WCS 4Rapply through the school district or county office of education where he or she is employed or is seeking employment,        
WCS 5Rdirectly to the Commission, and must include verification of satisfying the Basic Skills Requirement.                        
WCSR1RIf the holder is again unable to satisfy the Basic Skills Requirement, he or she must submit verification in the form of     
WCSR2Rofficial transcripts or letters from employers of the course work, in-service training, tutoring, or other activities        
WCSR3Rcompleted in an attempt to satisfy the Basic Skills Requirement, and must apply through the employing district, county, or   
WCSR4Ragency.                                                                                                                      
WR  1RThe waived requirement is completion of the professional preparation program.  To qualify for the credential or certificate  
WR  2Rwhich authorizes this service without the waiver, the holder must complete the requirements specified by a California        
WR  3Rcollege or university that has a Commission-approved program for this credential and must receive a formal recommendation    
WR  4Rfrom that college or university.                                                                                             
